The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Library of Entertainment Handbook, by 
John Chilton Scammell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Library of Entertainment Handbook

Author: John Chilton Scammell

Release Date: February 18, 2016 [EBook #51248]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIBRARY OF ENTERTAINMENT ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, John Campbell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







  TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  Bold text is denoted by =equal signs=.

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within
  the text and consultation of external sources.

  More detail can be found at the end of the book.




  THE
  LIBRARY OF
  ENTERTAINMENT

  A THOUSAND HOURS OF ENJOYMENT
  WITH THE WORLD'S GREAT WRITERS

  HANDBOOK

  BY JOHN CHILTON SCAMMELL, A.B.

  CHICAGO AND BOSTON

  GEO. L. SHUMAN & CO.

  MCMXX




  COPYRIGHT, 1915,
  BY GEO. L. SHUMAN & CO.


  _Norwood Press_
  _J. S. Cashing Co.--Berwick & Smith Co._
  _Norwood, Mass., U.S.A._

  _Boston Bookbinding Co., Cambridge, Mass._




CONTENTS


                                                        PAGE

  PREFACE                                                  v

  THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK                                xi


      PART I

  SIDE-LIGHTS ON GREAT WRITERS                             1

  'TO DRIVE DULL CARE AWAY'                               12


      PART II

  THE STUDY OF LITERATURE                                 17

  THE DECISIVE PERIODS IN LITERATURE                      19

  NATIONAL CHARACTERISTICS                                28

  THE DIVISIONS OF LITERATURE                             36

  FROM SEVEN TO TWENTY-ONE                               54a

  THE USE OF THE INDEX AND THE BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES     54m

  LITERARY CRITICISM                                      55


      PART III

  STUDIES OF GREAT AUTHORS                                61

    BURNS                                                 61

    SCOTT                                                 64

    WORDSWORTH                                            67

    COLERIDGE                                             70

    BYRON                                                 72

    SHELLEY                                               76

    KEATS                                                 78

    TENNYSON                                              81

    BROWNING, R.                                          83

    BROWNING, E. B.                                       86

    IRVING                                                89

    POE                                                   91

    HAWTHORNE                                             94

    BRYANT                                                97

    LONGFELLOW                                            99

    WHITTIER                                             102

    LOWELL                                               104

    HOLMES                                               107

    HOMER                                                109

    VERGIL                                               113

    DANTE                                                116

    MILTON                                               119

    SHAKESPEARE                                          122

    GOETHE                                               126

    SCHILLER                                             129

    DICKENS                                              131

    THACKERAY                                            134

    JOHNSON                                              136

    GOLDSMITH                                            139

    GRAY                                                 141

    BURKE                                                143

    WEBSTER                                              146

    PLATO                                                148

    AURELIUS                                             151

    BACON                                                153

    CARLYLE                                              156

    RUSKIN                                               159

    EMERSON                                              162

    HEINE                                                164

    PLINY                                                166




PREFACE


"Nowhere so happy as curled up in a corner with a book." So said, or
is reputed to have said, no less a genius than St. Thomas à Kempis.
And thousands of men and women, boys and girls, still testify to the
truth and power of that saying. For of all friends or companions a
book is the most reliable--often quite as helpful as any Jonathan to
any David. For instance, what could have given Abraham Lincoln more
lasting help than those early volumes which he so hungrily devoured
over and over again? "Æsop's Fables," "Robinson Crusoe," "Benjamin
Franklin's Autobiography," "The Pilgrim's Progress" absorbed every
moment he could spare from his chores and his sleep. Not mere
knowledge, but inspiration entered his soul from those oft-read
pages; in them he gleaned visions of life, its strain and anguish,
its exaltation and thrill; there, too, he caught the secret of that
quaint faculty for terse anecdote by which he was to win his way not
only to the heads but to the hearts of the hardy, courageous folk
of the Middle West, and, later, those of the East as well. It was
through this power to read and understand and enjoy that Lincoln
learned to penetrate to the very soul of mankind, the deep recesses
of the thoughts and feelings of his fellow men.

The will to try, the simple decision to make the effort, is all that
is needed in order to grasp what an infinite fund of amusement and
delight lies stored away in books. No unusual imaginative powers are
requisite to get us on horseback with Dumas's swashbuckling, duelling
musketeers, or to place us beside Poe's heroes in their dread
predicaments. What friend or acquaintance can tell you half the tales
of hair-breadth escape, side-splitting dilemma, or tender romance,
such as scores of the cleverest writers have spent their lives in
devising? These same writers have left this world, they can never
more be seen or heard on earth; but the very essence of their talent
and their personality, their brightest, most sparkling thoughts and
ideas remain, and may readily be placed within reach of your own
hand. Charles Dickens can never again voyage over the Atlantic and
stroll across Boston Common in velvet coat and plaid waistcoat,
gesticulating with eyes a-twinkle. But his Mr. Pickwick's adventure
with the Middle-Aged Lady in Yellow Curl-Papers still remains, and
the echo of Pickwick's "Bless my soul, what a dreadful thing" will
ring in our ears forever, and forever stir a quiet chuckle. Rudyard
Kipling is growing old, and his pen no longer flourishes with the
reckless vivacity of the days when he was little more than a "cub"
reporter and wrote "Mandalay." Yet that same "Mandalay" of the "old
Moulmein pagoda" and the "tinkly temple bells" will rouse a thrill
of romance and adventure in thousands of hearts that are still to be
born. Poor Stevenson coughed his life away at Samoa, after a plucky
fight for life that led him to France, 'Frisco, and the South Seas.
None the less, though he has gone from us, the pictures of hope and
courage that leap and laugh at us from his pages are as vivid to-day
as when they first brought their new joy to the delighted world. Read
once more that dainty sketch--that etching rather--"A Night among
the Pines," and see for yourself how that great master of words has
voiced our modern appreciation of the great outdoors. For each great
author is an individual, no two of them are alike, any more than you
are like your next-door neighbor. Their modes of expression, their
joy in life are as varied and divergent as life itself. There is,
moreover, nothing commonplace about them, their work is strong and
fresh. Each has his tale to tell, his song to sing, his meditations
to entrust to us, his own special message to the spirit or to the
intellect of many a generation and many a race.

In other words, all great authors are artists, makers or shapers
of truth and beauty, just as much and in the same measure as are
painters and sculptors. Indeed, Literature is the chief of the Fine
Arts. Music, with all its grandeur and charm, is but sound, and dies
away; Painting, though never so rich in color and striking in form,
is passive and for the most part devoid of action, and sad to say,
very few of us have wealth enough to own even one canvas by a master;
Sculpture, with all its dignity and grace, is cold and cheerless
in the main; and Architecture is too bulky and ponderous to stir
personal appreciation at a moment's notice.

In fact, Literature, and Literature alone, possesses the power of
meeting our every mood and desire, for comfort, for excitement, for
exaltation, for pathos, for laughter.

Literature alone can dwell within the walls of the humblest cabin,
even in the squatter's camp in Labrador or Borneo. Raphael's glorious
paintings may only be visited at the expense of months of time and
hundreds of dollars; Beethoven's symphonies can only be presented
by the most finished orchestras in a few of our largest cities; the
statues wrought by Phidias and Rodin cannot be reproduced by the
thousand and spread broadcast over our nation; Rheims Cathedral and
her sister marvels must stand where first they rose, nor may they
be successfully imitated. But, thank Heaven, Shakespeare, Dickens,
Longfellow for a few cents send their messages to every soul on earth
that can read English.

All of us are acquainted with some half dozen of the immortal writers
of the world, but how many of them have we never met, perhaps have
never heard of. If we could only obtain an introduction to them;
if we only knew which writers and which of their works to select,
all would be well. The most brilliant, the most lovable, the most
sincere, the most thoughtful authors would gather round us and talk
to us; they would bring their very best to entertain and delight
us; they would offer us their guidance and companionship into every
field of thought. Emerson's calm reflective tones reveal the answers
to many of life's most pressing and significant problems; Swift, in
"Gulliver's Travels," jestingly, yet bitterly, strips mankind of its
pride and conceit, and lays bare the greed and selfishness that have
ruined not individuals alone, but whole nations and empires; Lewis
Carroll talks the most laughable, clever nonsense that ever inspired
a humorist's pen; Burns, in the simplest of language, voices the
pathos and tragedy of every life, even the humblest, and with our
own Lincoln proves again and again that true nobility may dwell and
flourish in the midst of poverty.

Truly, herein lies one of life's chief joys, in encountering what
others have thought and achieved--in meeting the actors in the great
world drama, the scenes in which they played their parts, the deeds
by which they have won fame and fortune; still more delectable is the
pleasure of whiling away leisure hours with those folk who are but
products of the fancy, children of the poet's brain, dreams of the
teller of tales: Odysseus, who, for the last three thousand years, as
Sir Philip Sidney has put it, "held children from play and old men
from the chimney corner"; Falstaff, chuckling at the comical ease
with which he hoodwinks all about him; Lady Macbeth, who, even in her
dreams, may not forget the dread stain upon her little hand; Faust,
ever seeking to rid himself of his demon accomplice; the knights of
King Arthur's round table, Robin Hood and his merry men, Dickens's
troop of immortal grotesques, Bret Harte's rough miners, with their
hearts of gold, Irving's droll New Yorkers of the Knickerbocker era,
Longfellow's Blacksmith and his Evangeline,--these and a host of
other undying notables have made life far richer for us all.

Ours is the fault if we do not avail ourselves of their magic. For
here in America the special opportunity to mingle with them lies
readier to the hand than in any other nation. Nowhere else, not in
England, nor France, nor in Italy can the everyday man find books at
his command for the asking. In a few of the largest European cities,
and not anywhere else on that continent, there are libraries of size
and worth, yet even these are hedged about with a hundred rules and
regulations that hamper circulation. But here, through the length and
breadth of this glorious land, are thousands and yet more thousands
of free libraries, containing all manner of books, of every age and
nation, awaiting your demand. They contain all that is splendid in
the way of printed matter, but also much, alas, that is not worth any
man's time; so that though the best lies open and free to us, it is
mingled with a vast amount of wretched trash.

Here lies the chief difficulty for us Americans: How are we to
distinguish the chaff from the wheat, the weeds from the harvest? The
task is that of seeking the proverbial needle in the haystack. We are
deluged with printed matter, tons upon tons of books and magazines
are poured daily upon the bookseller's counters. What is our chance
of choosing the treasures from out this hodgepodge?

To meet this very problem these volumes have been prepared; it is
hardly our place to dwell upon the years of labor and thought in
which they have gradually taken shape, but it is perhaps to the point
to remark that they represent the patient effort of many judges and
critics to supply an introduction and a guide to the best and most
inspiring literature of the nations from the beginning of the art
to the present day,--a means of recreation, amusement, and lasting
profit.

In the past three thousand years, some four hundred authors have
achieved such fame and standing as to distinguish them from the
endless multitudes of commonplace penmen. To choose and present their
very best work in complete, unified selections has constituted the
fundamental purpose of these twelve volumes. In them, it is certain,
an amazingly large proportion of the finest literature has been
brought together; they form a boundless source of entertainment and a
wellnigh infinite field for intellectual diversion and development.

By means of brief and suggestive biographical sketches, together with
the Index and the Handbook, to serve as a guide to fuller enjoyment
and appreciation, the editors have sought to amplify and enhance
the value of the selective feature of the work. And through an
abundance of illustrations, many of them painstaking reproductions of
water color paintings of the homes and favorite haunts of the chief
writers, additional understanding and pleasure is afforded.

The whole of this work has been built on the central idea of
entertainment that shall be simple and unified. Every effort has
been made to shun the elaborate, intricate methods that prevail so
wastefully to-day in our educational and our recreational systems.
At last educators are openly admitting that the only sane means
of raising our standards of education must lie in simplifying the
quantity of the studies so as to attain higher quality. In school and
out of it, Johnny and his sister Molly will unquestionably profit by
simple, straightforward teaching, play, reading, thinking. The more
complex a game is, the fewer people can enjoy it or appreciate its
fine points; the more involved a school system, the fewer children
will be able to acquire thorough training. But simple games and
simple instruction will enable all of us and of our little ones to
get the habit of thoroughness and stability. These twelve volumes,
then, are all constructed upon this principle of furnishing enjoyment
in a simple, clean-cut manner; they constitute one of the most
straightforward, clear, and forceful means toward the advance of our
civilization.

The measure of a successful life is surely the amount of happiness,
of true lasting pleasure which it has contained and which it has
passed on to others. We do not count our years in terms of sorrow or
vexation; we do not recall again and again our moments of failure or
folly; only the bright and golden hours remain fast emblazoned in
our memories, those days of sunshine and delight, when beauty and
laughter sang in our hearts and the air was filled with music. Of all
such days, those on which the friendly pages of some treasured author
were first opened, or those when we reveled in the companionship of
our favorite heroes of romance and adventure--those days indeed are
among the brightest of all. The greater the number of red-letter
days of such wonder and rapture, the greater the value of our lives,
not only to ourselves, but to all who have shared them. In work and
in play, at home and abroad, our undoubted ideal is that of finding
perpetual joy in life. The Fountain of Youth, which Ponce de Leon
vainly sought, is the quest of us all--we no longer seek to lengthen
our lives, but instead we strive with might and main to fill them to
the very brim with joyous thoughts and deeds. To be happy is to be
forever young.




THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK


It is the easiest thing in the world to open the treasure-vaults of
the Bank of England--if you have the combination; if you haven't, the
task is hopeless. It is the easiest thing in the world to enjoy the
most brilliant stories, the most laughable humor, the most heroic
deeds that the world has known--if you know where to find them.

"Where's something to read, something so interesting that I can
forget how tired I am and what a hard day I had at the office?" There
is the problem of almost every home in this country. Tired men and
women must have some means of refreshing themselves, of forgetting
their worries and trials for a time. They must rest and gather
strength for the next day's work. Where are they going to get it?

The purpose of this book is to give the owners of THE LIBRARY OF
ENTERTAINMENT an easy answer to that question. Its opening pages
contain some unusual notes on the oddities of literary folk and some
suggestions for hours and hours of entertainment and amusement that
will drive away care and fatigue unfailingly. The brightest stories
and the most fascinating humor are put right on the table beside you,
all you have to do is to turn to them according to the directions in
these pages.

But there is something better still in this little volume. It gives
a true opportunity to enjoy the company of the ablest men and women
who have ever put pen to paper. Until now a college course of three
or four years has been the only means of getting in touch with the
best of good, sensible reading. Our schools do not teach us how to
understand and take pleasure in these books; our libraries only store
them for us to use if we already know about them. Recent figures
show that for some time past more than 10,000 new books have been
published in the United States each year, an equal number in England,
and even more in Germany and Russia. The public libraries contain
millions upon millions printed in the past. It would be impossible
for even a hundred men giving their whole lifetime of eighty years to
do as much as scan the pages of all the world's literature.

Therefore it is only too evident that for the sensible use of the
little time which we can give to reading we should be enabled to
make a selection. We must be started on the right road. This is the
express aim of THE LIBRARY OF ENTERTAINMENT. Until now the pleasure
and the distinction that come from being well-read have belonged to
a few. The combination that opens the treasure-vaults of literature
was only given in college lectures. The outside world has been left
to shift for itself. But this is utterly wrong; with the simple
introduction that is given in Part Two of this book the world of
literature and its lasting delights are open to all.




PART I




SIDE-LIGHTS ON GREAT WRITERS


To many of us it seems as if an author with an assured reputation
must be one of the happiest of men; yet some of the very greatest
have suffered almost intolerably.

Bobby Burns was a victim of drink largely because of his brilliant
imagination and extreme sensitiveness. He was petted by society and
praised as the poet of the future; all England was at his feet. Yet
he gave way to his passions, took to drink, and ruined the lives of
several of his dearest friends, as well as his own. In almost anyone
else this would condemn him absolutely; but the truth is that his
poetic powers, the gift of his genius, rendered him too sensitive to
moods of the moment, and his will could not hold out under the strain.

A somewhat similar case was that of Coleridge. In his youth he showed
extraordinary talent, but he fell a victim to opium and the greater
part of his life was wasted in a series of unfinished efforts. No
opium was necessary to stimulate his imagination, as his weird ballad
of "The Ancient Mariner" plainly shows. Indeed his genius even worked
during his sleep, for "Kubla Khan" is but a fragment of a poem which
he dreamed and then began to write down as soon as he awoke. If he
had not been interrupted by a visitor, a man of no importance, we
might have had the whole instead of a scanty portion of this unique
masterpiece. Even as it stands it is one of the most picturesque and
brilliant compositions ever produced. It seems incredible that it
should be the work of a sleeping brain. And yet this is the man who
gave himself up to opium, wrecking a career that promised to surpass
even that of Byron or Shelley in poetic power.

Thomas De Quincey, the author of the "Confessions of an Opium
Eater," drank laudanum by the glassful. He first took to using this
liquid form of opium in order to gain relief from the dyspepsia that
resulted from his days of privation in the streets of London. Of
course he was unable to stop the use of the drug and had to increase
the doses to the alarming extent mentioned. When he was living in
Edinburgh this almost caused the death of a gentleman who dined with
him there; for his visitor picked up a decanter of a rich, dark red
liquor, which he thought was port wine, poured out a glass, and had
it at his lips, when De Quincey hurriedly seized it and saved the
situation. Smoking opium was not the custom then; Coleridge drank it,
as De Quincey did, and unknowingly spread the habit; for a poor man
who once lived near Coleridge's house admitted that he had obtained
laudanum from a boy who worked for Coleridge and smuggled it out to
his friend by the bottleful.

As we all know, our great American short story writer, Edgar Allan
Poe, was the prey of alcohol and also of opium, as well as a genius.
The combination seems to have been more unavoidable in his case than
in any other we know of. His imagination could only bring forth those
extraordinarily gruesome tales of mystery and horror when stimulated
by wines and brandy or opium. His whole life was spent in the shadow
of despondency and irritation; and although we are indebted to him
for priceless literary gems, he paid the penalty with misery which we
cannot imagine.

In contrast, look at the life of Charles Lamb. He was a poor clerk
at a pitiful salary, struggling to increase his income by literary
work in his spare time, with a dangerous appetite for alcohol, and
an insane sister to take care of. He, himself, constantly dreaded
insanity. Yet he kept up a cheerful and continual resistance to his
craving for drink, although he often took a drop too much. In order
to care for his sister, who had killed her mother in one of her
attacks, he gave up his sweetheart and settled down to the brave and
heartrending task of devotion to the unhappy invalid. This lasted
for thirty-three years, during which he never murmured except when
her attacks forced him to place her in an asylum. One of his friends
leaves the record of meeting Charles and Mary Lamb walking across
the fields to the hospital with tears streaming down their faces.
Yet in spite of all his troubles Lamb's essays have a delicacy and a
cheerfulness that never reveal the burden he had to bear. He is one
of the great heroes of English literature.

John Milton was another such hero. As a young man he won great
distinction as a poet and a scholar; so much so that when he
went to Italy the greatest Italian authors and critics praised
his Italian and Latin poetry as the best of that day, superior
to anything written during that time in Italy itself. He was
received there with boundless enthusiasm and was having the time
of his life, so to speak, when the news reached him of the Puritan
rebellion against Charles the First. Without a moment's hesitation
he abandoned his tour and came back to England. There he acted as
foreign correspondent for Cromwell's Government and kept England
safe from attacks by France and the rest of Europe through his able
diplomacy. He worked day and night until he fell ill and eventually
lost his eyesight. To make matters worse, the Puritans were deprived
of their power and Milton's enemies then persecuted him so that he
had to fly for his life. He spent the rest of his days in a humble
cottage, while his daughters grumbled because he made them transcribe
"Paradise Lost" and "Paradise Regained." It seems as if his sacrifice
for his country was utterly unrewarded, until we remember that his
name to-day is almost the first in its long roll of poets.

One of the sorrows of literary men is lack of appreciation.
Longfellow was laughed at by the Harvard students whom he taught,
for his poems had no attraction for them and he was only appreciated
elsewhere. Bret Harte wrote the finest stories of California life
that have ever appeared, yet for years he was not recognized in this
country as a writer of unusual powers, and as a matter of fact he
spent the greater part of his life in London, six thousand miles
from his old home; Lafcadio Hearn was so homely and eccentric that
he could not be happy or comfortable in the United States or in
Europe, and took refuge in Japan where his appearance would never
be remarked. As he points out in his wonderful writings on Japanese
life, politeness is one of the ruling habits of that race, so that
he was made far more comfortable and did far better work than would
have been possible in his own country.

Some writers have done their best work in prison. "The Star Spangled
Banner," as we know, was written by Francis Scott Key, while he was
a captive on a British battleship during the bombardment of Fort
McHenry, near Baltimore, in the War of 1812, and as he wondered
whether the flag was still flying he jotted down the lines of our
National Anthem. The masterpiece of Spanish literature was written
in jail; "Don Quixote" is so amusing, so pathetic, and so vivid
that Spain can stake her whole reputation on that one work, written
by Cervantes, an innocent man, imprisoned through envy and malice.
John Bunyan, another guiltless author, wrote his immortal "Pilgrim's
Progress" while he was locked up for his stubborn refusal to mold his
religious belief according to the demands of authorities for whom he
could have no respect. The opium of Coleridge and De Quincey and the
brandy of Edgar Allan Poe never stimulated them to equal the work
of these two geniuses. Innocence in prison has been proved superior
to dissipation in the best of surroundings, for the opium victims,
Coleridge and De Quincey, had the society of England's most brilliant
men and the environment of her finest scenery.

Both Bunyan and Cervantes worked hard, but the hardest workers of
all have been Frenchmen; Balzac and Dumas labored unceasingly for
the greater part of their lifetimes. In twenty years Balzac wrote
ninety-seven novels for a mere pittance that just kept body and
soul together. The greatness of his work was recognized, but the
French public, as a whole, did so little reading, that the publisher
himself did not make anything like a fortune. Dumas was more popular
and employed a staff of assistants to collect the material for his
historical romances, but the actual writing was all his own and cost
him from fourteen to eighteen hours a day in labor. His works are
more numerous than those of Dickens, Thackeray, and Cooper combined.
It seems incredible that one man could have turned out such a
tremendous mass of fascinating stories.

The only man in English literature who is to be compared to these
two Frenchmen is Sir Walter Scott. In his first success, when money
flowed in on him almost in torrents, his vanity led him to build the
mansion of Abbotsford and his one wish was to be regarded as the
Squire or ruler of the countryside, but not long after, when his
partner in the publishing business had caused the failure of the
firm, he bravely went to work and wrote novel after novel, year after
year, to pay off his debts. His vanity and love of show disappeared
and the man's true nobility took its proper place; almost on his
death-bed he continued to dictate his novels although he was agonized
with pain and distress.

Similar patience was shown by Thomas Carlyle, who rewrote the whole
of his great work, "The French Revolution," after the first copy had
been carelessly burnt by a servant girl in the house of a friend
who had borrowed the manuscript. He was a dyspeptic and a constant
grumbler, but on this occasion he redeemed himself by sitting down
quietly to work and hammering away at his dreary task until he had
once more finished the masterpiece. Carlyle was so sensitive to noise
and other disturbances that he had a sound-proof shed or room built
on the roof of his house in London, where he did a great part of his
writing, and even there he complained of the rumbling of the wagons
in the street, which vibrated through the house.

Herbert Spencer, the great English philosopher, was also easily
disturbed by noises, but he solved the problem by wearing ear muffs
which were specially made under his instruction. Spencer was rather
irritable, it is said; certainly on one occasion he made himself a
source of amusement when he objected to being beaten at billiards by
the son of a friend of his and remarked that it was not fitting that
a young man should have spent so much time and money on so foolish a
pastime; yet when he won, the expenditure of thought and time on the
part of so great a philosopher seemed altogether wise.

Robert Browning had an amusing experience on one occasion toward the
close of his life. He was walking through the residential district of
London's fashionable West End to a meeting which he had been invited
to attend. Mistaking the house, he walked into a literary gathering
that was discussing his own poems. Presently he rose to his feet and
offered a few suggestions as to the meaning of a rather difficult
passage. Now Browning was not at all like a poet in appearance, but
rather resembled a prosperous business man, and it happened that as
he was well toward the back of the hall no one recognized him. On the
contrary his suggestions were ridiculed by other critics who took
the floor when he sat down and he retired unrecognized but vastly
delighted. Of course some of Browning's work is intensely intricate
and confused; he himself said of his early poem "Sordello" that once
there were two beings who understood it, the Almighty and Robert
Browning; now, he added, there was but one, for Browning had long
lost the key to its problem.

Charles Dickens was one of the most impressionable writers who
ever lived. His characters were absolutely real to him and when
he was writing he would impersonate the various characters he
was describing, talking, making faces, jumping up and looking in
the mirror, and then dashing back to his desk to set down each
inspiration. But his impressionable nature prevented complete
happiness; he was either intensely happy or down in the dumps and
miserable. This made him very hard to get along with, so that it is
no wonder that his wife found it almost impossible to live with him.

Gladstone, the 'Grand Old Man' of English politics in the last
century, was a scholar and a linguist as well as a statesman.
On one occasion he was seated in the House of Commons while his
bitter opponent, the clever Disraeli, was delivering a venomous and
brilliant attack upon him. During the speech Gladstone was observed
to be writing on a scrap of paper, apparently taking notes for his
reply. At the conclusion of his enemy's speech Gladstone rose and
delivered a most masterly refutation of the attack, answering and
breaking down each point of Disraeli's invective with the utmost
skill. A member sitting near by noticed that the scrap of paper was
lying on Gladstone's seat and picked it up to see what the notes
were like; to his surprise they consisted of a careful translation
of "Rock of Ages" into smooth Greek verse, which the orator had made
half-consciously while waiting for the occasion to reply to his
opponent.

Macaulay, too, had wonderful scholastic talent and a fine memory.
Even in his youth he showed great ability and read with amazing
speed; most remarkable is the fact that he never seemed to forget
a line he had read, but could repeat pages of an author many years
after he had once perused his work. He read many works again and
again, it is true, but for the pleasure of enjoying the fine points
of style rather than for the sake of attaining greater familiarity
with the book. His essays are regarded as among the most brilliant in
the language, and seem to have been written posthaste, at full swing.
In reality, however, he was well pleased if he produced five foolscap
pages of longhand manuscript a day. It was his custom to spend the
morning writing as fast as he could, the afternoon, in revising and
pruning the morning's work and thus producing finished copy. He knew
only too well that, as Sheridan said, "easy writing makes cursed hard
reading," and that labor alone could produce a forceful and pleasant
style.

Goethe, the greatest of the German immortals, is mainly remembered
as a poet. Yet his fame would be great even if it depended only upon
his scientific exploits. It was he who did much toward establishing
the modern theory of evolution. Goethe also showed his insight into
human progress by prophesying the construction of the Suez and the
Panama Canals as long ago as 1827; this illustrates the marvelous
imagination of the genius who was, as he himself said, a citizen of
the world.

Shakespeare is certainly the supreme master of English literature,
yet there was a time when he was regarded as a nuisance and a
good-for-nothing. He was a poacher, a thieving vagabond arrested for
stealing or killing deer in the park of the neighboring aristocrat,
Sir Thomas Lucy. It was not long afterward that the future playwright
went to London and gained his first acquaintance with the theater
by holding horses for gentlefolk at the entrance of the principal
playhouse of the city. Some authors would also call him a pirate and
a thief, as Sir Thomas Lucy did, for he took plots and ideas wherever
he found them and worked them over into the revised versions that now
rank among the finest achievements of mankind. Yet all the while
his one desire was to be a well-to-do business man of his native
town of Stratford, and as soon as he had made a comfortable fortune
he retired and spent his last years in quiet, building a new house
and writing one or two last plays in the commonplace seclusion of a
country town. There is still one place left in London where his plays
were performed under his direction, although the old theaters have
long since perished. This is the Temple Hall, in the grounds that
belonged to the old Knights Templar of Crusading fame. Here he put on
"The Winter's Tale" with great success. If you are ever in London you
can visit the hall and on entering you can turn the very door-handle,
so tradition says, which the poet himself used.

Molière was the greatest French dramatist. At the height of his
career, legend relates, he was such a favorite with the grand
monarch, Louis XIV, that this proud king made him come and dine in
private with him, so as to convince his servants and courtiers that
the genius whom they thought of as a vulgar, impossible boor, a mere
actor, was worthy of the greatest consideration. Yet when Molière was
dead the king ungratefully refused to see that he was properly buried
and the great man was carried to his last resting-place with little
ceremony.

At the present day one of France's most prominent writers is Rostand,
the author of "Cyrano de Bergerac," a play which brought him into
instant popularity through its brilliance, although a few weeks
before scarcely anyone had heard his name. On the first night of the
production, in 1897, the audience cheered and shouted until it seemed
as if the performance would break up in the confusion created by its
success, yet thanks to Rostand's coolness the actors and even the
spectators were kept calm enough to carry the play through to its
masterly conclusion. At the close, when the curtain had fallen on the
last act, Rostand was sought for everywhere to make his bow to the
enthusiastic audience, but he had quietly driven away to his country
home, with his wife, and there he stayed for a week or more before
the public had a chance to welcome him.

Byron is almost the only man in English letters to come so suddenly
before the people. He woke up one morning to find himself famous,
through the publication of "Childe Harold." Byron was another of
the unhappy geniuses. He was hot-headed and married an equally
irritable wife, so naturally they separated, with anger and yet
with sorrow. His little daughter, who he said was the one friend he
had in the world, died at an early age. He dreaded being fat and
therefore starved himself, a process which did not make him happier.
But his death was in itself enough to redeem him in spite of his
irresponsible and rather selfish career, for he gave himself up to
the cause of the freedom and independence of the Greeks, and died of
fever contracted while preparing for the great campaign against the
Turks.

Poor Dean Swift, the author of "Gulliver's Travels," the bitterest
book ever written about human beings, suffered even more than Byron.
He was keenly sensitive, and his political labors were poorly paid
because he was none too courteous in his manner to the political
leaders for whom he worked so hard. Boot-licking would have brought
him the position he desired, but Swift was not a toady, so he was
driven to accept the second-rate place offered him, and there vented
his anger in the most savage attacks on human nature that can be
imagined. All this while he had been fearing that his mind would give
way; "I am like that tree," he said to a friend one day when they
were out walking, "I shall die at the top first." He was right, for
not long afterward his brain gave way.

"The Old Oaken Bucket" still has a touch of beauty for us, if we
do not hear it too often. It was written under rather interesting
circumstances. Samuel Woodworth, the author, was born and brought up
on a little farm in Scituate, not far from Plymouth, Massachusetts.
In his youth he went to New York and got a job as a reporter. One
day he was in a bar, taking a glass of brandy and declaring that it
was the finest drink on earth, when a friend with him said, "You're
wrong; think of the delicious water you used to draw from the old
well at home." Woodworth jumped up and hurried over to his rooms,
where he sat down and dashed off the outline of the song that at once
won a widespread vogue.

Perhaps the bravest fight against ill health was put up by Robert
Louis Stevenson, the gentle, lovable poet and novelist. As a young
man he found that consumption threatened to carry him off. With the
cheerfulness characteristic of the victims of the White Plague he
set off on a series of outdoor trips afoot and afloat. Two of these
are preserved for us in his "Inland Voyage" and the more fascinating
"Travels with a Donkey." This latter is almost unequaled as a picture
of travel. He finally started for America to see if the climate there
would not be better for him than the moist weather of Scotland, his
home. Eventually he reached Samoa, in the South Seas of the Pacific,
where he lived for several years, cheerful and brave in spite of his
increasing weakness. His character, although mild and kindly, was so
forceful that the chiefs among the natives held him in veneration,
and at the time of his death no one lamented him more than the simple
Samoans, some of whom bore him to the grave on the hill-top near his
home.

Thoreau, one of New England's philosophers of the great and glorious
Emerson days, was as eccentric as any one that can be found. For the
sake of peace and independence he went off into the woods and lived
as a hermit near Walden Pond, outside Concord. To earn what little
money he needed he made lead pencils; like many country folks of
those days he was amazingly dexterous with his knife and his pencils
were a delight to use. In his leisure he made an exhaustive study of
the Pond; but in two years' time he left this little cabin and never
returned. He said that he had had enough of that sort of life and
now he was going to try something else. His was the same spirit of
adventure that stirred the old explorers and yet he was so fond of
New England that he rarely set foot outside her boundaries. He could
find enough to keep him busy thinking and writing within his own
dooryard. But he showed that it was possible for a man in good health
to live on less than $100 a year and have more than two thirds of his
time to himself. On the other hand, as he died of consumption at the
age of forty-four, he also proved that outdoor life is not in itself
a preventive of that scourge.

Whittier, the gentle Quaker poet, was one of the sturdiest heroes of
the antislavery movement. In those days he was a fighter, stoned and
mobbed by the partisans of slavery in Philadelphia and Concord, New
Hampshire. His genius was discovered by William Lloyd Garrison, the
abolitionist, while he was editing a paper at Newburyport. Whittier's
sister had sent some verses of her young brother's to the paper and
Garrison not only printed them but hunted up the author to enlist him
in his good work. In his latter years Whittier clung to the rural
obscurity of Amesbury, where he enjoyed the rippling life of the
little town, talking local politics with the 'natives' in the country
store, chatting with his friends on the doorstep of the Friends'
meeting-house which he had helped to build, or planting trees about
it, like Holmes, who used to boast that at one time or another he
had set out more than seven hundred saplings. Whittier, more than
any other American, has left us glowing pictures of New England life
and geniality. With his reverent sense of the need for emphasizing
morals and duty there was a love of home, of the memory of youth's
work and play that makes "Snow-Bound" immortal. Emerson was the
Yankee philosopher; Hawthorne, the novelist of New England's moods;
Thoreau, the nature-worshiper; Holmes, the Bostonian; Longfellow, the
cosmopolitan poet; but Whittier was the poet of New England's heart.




'TO DRIVE DULL CARE AWAY'

The brightest and most delightful pages that have ever been written.

Short stories, humor, adventure, and fun.


SHORT STORIES

  ALDRICH: "Père Antoine's Date Palm."

  BALZAC: "The Purse."

  BARRIE: "Lads and Lassies."

  BJÖRNSON: "The Railroad and the Churchyard."

  BOCCACCIO: "The Story of Constantia," "The Story of Federigo and
  the Falcon."

  BROWN: "Rab and his Friends."

  COLLINS: "A Terribly Strange Bed."

  CRAWFORD: "The Upper Berth."

  ELIOT: "Brother Jacob."

  HALE: "The Man Without a Country."

  HARDY: "The Three Strangers."

  HARTE: "Tennessee's Partner."

  HAWTHORNE: "The Snow-Image."

  IRVING: "Rip Van Winkle."

  JAPANESE LITERATURE: "The Forty-Seven Rônins."

  KIPLING: "The Man Who Would Be King."

  MACLEOD: "The Washer of the Ford."

  MAUPASSANT: "The Piece of String."

  MEREDITH: "The Story of Noorna Bin Noorka, the Genie Karaz, and
  the Princess of Oolb," "The Punishment of Shahpesh, the Persian,
  on Khipil, the Builder."

  POE: "The Fall of the House of Usher," "The Cask of Amontillado."

  STERNE: "The Story of Le Fevre."

  STEVENSON: "A Lodging for the Night."

  TOLSTOI: "Where Love is, There God is Also."


FAIRY TALES

  ANDERSEN: "The Hardy Tin Soldier," "The Ugly Duckling," "The Old
  Street Lamp."

  APULEIUS: "The Story of Cupid and Psyche."

  ARABIAN NIGHTS: "Ali Baba and the Forty Robbers," "Abon-Hassan
  the Wag, or the Sleeper Awakened," "The Story of the Three
  Apples."

  FOUQUÉ: "Undine."

  GRIMM: "Cinderella," "Hansel and Grethel," "The Two Brothers."

  PERRAULT: "Little Red Riding-Hood," "Blue Beard," "Puss in Boots."

  RUSSIAN LITERATURE: "The Water King and Vasilissa the Wise."


HUMOR

  BARHAM: "The Knight and the Lady."

  BROWNE: "The Showman's Courtship."

  CARROLL: "A Mad Tea-Party," "The White Knight," "The Walrus and
  the Carpenter," "Jabberwocky."

  COWPER: "The Diverting History of John Gilpin."

  GILBERT: "The Yarn of the Nancy Bell."

  HARRIS: "Old Mr. Rabbit, He's a Good Fisherman."

  HARTE: "Plain Language from Truthful James."

  HOOD: "Faithless Sally Brown."

  HOPE: "The House Opposite."

  JERROLD: "Mrs. Caudle's Curtain Lectures."

  LAMB: "A Dissertation on Roast Pig."

  LOWELL: "The Courtin'."

  RASPE: "Baron Münchhausen."

  STERNE: "A Sentimental Journey."


ADVENTURE

  AUDUBON: "Hospitality in the Woods."

  CARLYLE: "The Fall of the Bastille."

  COLERIDGE: "The Rime of the Ancient Mariner."

  FROUDE: "A Cagliostro of the Second Century."

  HAY: "Jim Bludso of the Prairie Belle."

  HEARN: "In the Cave of the Children's Ghosts."

  HEINE: "Travel-Pictures."

  KINGLAKE: "Eothen."

  MANDEVILLE: "Travels."

  MELVILLE: "Typee."

  POLO: "Travels."

  STEVENSON: "A Night among the Pines."




PART II




THE STUDY OF LITERATURE


We are told there is no royal road to learning; no short cut to
the understanding and appreciation of literature. We are told that
we must admire Homer, or Addison, or some other immortal author,
but no one tells us _why_ or _how_. No explanation is given of the
reason why their work is deservedly immortal. Our schools do not
introduce us to the delights of good reading; instead, they handle
a few stories and essays as if they were Latin or algebra, making
drudgery out of what ought to be enjoyment. The result is that we are
frightened away from the great writers; their work is supposed to be
a mystery, only to be revealed to those who give years of labor to
its study.

But no one is so dull or so heedless of pleasure as not to accept
the means of lasting delight when it is put right in front of them.
Thousands of people are waiting for the chance to get in touch with
the good sense, rousing style, and splendid ideas of the masters of
literature. That is why this volume has been prepared. It furnishes
a direct and attractive road straight to the heart of literature. It
has been laid out systematically so as to be a simple and practical
guide.

The leading characteristics of each era, each nation, and each
division of literature have been tersely stated, with the authors
under each of these classifications listed beneath. The noblest and
most fascinating works gain tenfold in interest through the knowledge
of these fundamental facts. With them before you, you command a view,
not merely of one single author, but of the whole movement of which
he was a part. You see the ideas and lines of thought from which a
book has sprung, the hidden forces which went into the making of
it. Each book stands in association with those of the same literary
class, or nation, or period; their relationship with the rest of
literature is at once apparent. In this way the wasteful drudgery
and folly of aimless reading is avoided. The study of literature
pursued with the means here given cannot be tedious, for it is
straightforward, simple, and clear.

The results that are to be expected from the limited time which most
of us can devote to reading are more extensive than might be thought.
In this connection read the following selections, practical and
full of common sense, each of them throwing light on the subject of
reading.

  THE PREFACE, I, 3.

  HAMERTON, "To a Man of Business," VI, 236.

  HARRISON, from "The Choice of Books," VI, 275.

  MORLEY, "Popular Culture," IX, 236.

  SCHOPENHAUER, "On Books and Reading," X, 374.




THE DECISIVE PERIODS IN LITERATURE

FIRST OF ALL: =What is Literature?=

=The expression of thought upon the countless phases of life and the
universe as felt by the greatest intellects.=


There are innumerable views to be taken of this world of ours; each
of us sees it a little differently, the problem of life strikes a
nation or an age or an individual in ever changing ways. Homer saw
it in heroic terms, Swift, in "Gulliver's Travels," looked at it
savagely and sadly, Bunyan, in the "Pilgrim's Progress," saw the
religious side. These authors not only saw but felt; their feelings
took possession of them, they had to write them down and give them
expression. Gray, the author of the immortal "Elegy in a Country
Churchyard," took seven years to perfect the expression of the
feelings roused by what he saw in that secluded village nook. Poe
chose every word of his "Tales of Mystery and Imagination" with the
utmost care. The labor of composition was solely for the purpose of
giving the reader exactly the impression and emotion desired; for the
sake of clearness, force, and ease.


In the second place: Each of the great periods in history has
had certain traits and has excelled in some particular field of
literature. The traits and the works of an era have been molded
by preceding ages and likewise have brought about the development
of the periods which followed. Vergil was influenced by Homer and
the whole tradition of Greek literature; Shakespeare and the rest
of the Elizabethan writers are products of the fresh outburst of
activity which we call the Renaissance; Kipling has profited by the
work of Dickens, Poe, Milton, Chaucer, and a host of other authors.
If we are to appreciate a writer, then, we must know the chief
characteristics of these great literary epochs.

=The Age of the Ancients.= 1500 B.C.-500 A.D. From the dawn of
history to the fall of the Roman Empire, all the principal forms
of literary expression were developed, at least two of which, epic
poetry and tragedy, have never been surpassed. Yet the world was very
small then; it was merely the coast of the Mediterranean Sea. Its
ideals were narrow, limited by paganism and slavery. For those who
wrote and those who read there was no struggle for existence, they
were waited on by their slaves, they had no faith in a life after
death; whether thinkers or heedless wasters, they were selfishly
living for to-day and not for the morrow. The bulk of the people were
ignorant, even when not enslaved. As their literature was the product
of an aristocracy, leading a life of leisure, it was inevitably
stately, reserved, and formal in its tone, except in the earliest
productions before society had emerged completely from barbarism.

  POETRY

  Catullus
  Cleanthes
  Egyptian
  Lit.
  Homer
  Horace
  Ovid
  Pindar
  Sappho
  Theocritus
  Vergil

  FICTION

  Æsop
  Apuleius

  HISTORY

  Cæsar
  Herodotus
  Josephus
  Livy
  Suetonius
  Tacitus
  Thucydides

  BIOGRAPHY

  Plato
  Pliny
  Plutarch

  DRAMA

  Æschylus
  Euripides
  Sophocles

  PHILOSOPHY

  Aurelius
  Cicero
  Epictetus
  Lucretius
  Plato
  Seneca

=The Dark Ages.= 500 A.D.-1000 A.D. Crippled by pride and selfishness
Roman civilization was swept away by wave after wave of barbarian
invasions. Goths, Visigoths, Ostrogoths, Huns, Lombards, and Vandals
in turn swarmed over the face of Europe, spreading terror and
desolation. Learning, art, industry, and government perished. But
the invaders brought a love of freedom, a hatred of bondage and
captivity, to offset their contempt for the progress effected by the
great thinkers and rulers of antiquity.

There is but little left to us of the scanty literature produced in
those dim centuries. It is all primitive, Homeric; rhythmic tales of
the heroic lives and deaths of national leaders constitute the sole
endeavor that has lasted. But in these is _the note of freedom_, for
the masses of the people as well as the rulers and nobles delighted
in Charlemagne and his peerless knight Roland, or in Eric, the Viking
adventurer, who dared to sail far forth to Vinland. The great ruler
was not a mere commander but a leader whom men of every class gladly
followed with love as well as respect. Yet the ideals were low,
mainly of physical prowess and sheer brute strength.

  Anglo-Saxon Lit.
  French Lit.
  German Lit.
  Norse Lit.
  Spanish Lit.

=The Middle Ages.= 1000 A.D.-1400 A.D. However, as soon as the
dread of barbarian havoc had passed and peace and government had
been restored to some extent, a new and brighter era began. The
thirst for learning has never been greater than at this time.
Students flocked to the universities of Paris, Oxford, and Bologna
in thousands, begging their way, traveling on foot for hundreds of
miles. Religion seized men even more firmly, finding them active or
meditative occupations either in the monasteries or in the Crusades.
The aspirations of the time appear in the legends of King Arthur and
the Round Table, as told in the prose of the day by Sir Thomas Malory
or in the more recent verse of Tennyson's "Idylls of the King." This
is the chivalric ideal of perfect knighthood. The religious feeling
is shown in such hymns as the "Stabat Mater," the "Dies Iræ," or
"Jerusalem the Golden." Dante, commonly reckoned the second of the
world's poets, proves the zeal for learning and scholarship. The
spirit of freedom gleams from the "Old English Ballads" of Robin
Hood, the enemy of the oppressive nobles and the friend of the poor
and the humble. It is even more evident in the work of John Wyclif,
who translated the Bible into English so that the common peasant
might have the advantage of hearing the Gospel message read to him
in a tongue that he understood, and that he might feel that the
teachings of religion were meant for him as much as for the wealthy
and the learned.

But science and thought had not yet startled men into recognition of
the wonder round about them. Knowledge was assumed to be complete.
To probe into the mysteries of nature was unholy and wicked in those
days. The awakening from unseeing and unreasoning childhood to the
adventuresome zest of youth and young manhood was yet to come.

  POETRY

  Chaucer
  Dante
  Old English
  Ballads
  Petrarch
  Tasso

  FICTION

  Boccaccio
  Malory

  HISTORY

  Froissart

  TRAVEL

  Mandeville
  Polo

  RELIGION

  Bernard, St.
  Bernard of Cluny
  Jacopone
  à Kempis
  Thomas of Celano
  Wyclif

=The Renaissance.= 1400-1600. The gradual increase of knowledge
and better government toward the close of the Middle Ages caused a
desire for higher things. This hidden desire suddenly broke loose
with astonishing force when the art of printing was discovered, about
1450. Information had hitherto been spread only by word of mouth
or by laboriously copying a volume by hand. The process in either
case was slower than we can imagine. But now new ideas, rare books,
foreign teaching could be spread broadcast like wildfire.

It also happened at just this time that Constantinople was taken by
the Turks (1453). The greatest treasures of Greek literature had been
jealously hidden away there for centuries. Now that the scholars had
to fly for their lives they let loose a store of new thought on the
nations of western Europe. Taking refuge in Italy they brought with
them these rich volumes. The Italian enthusiasm and the ardor with
which these discoveries were published to the world spread like fire
through France and Germany and England.

Everywhere mankind awoke; never before or since have people lived
so strenuously. Their newly awakened curiosity drove them round the
Cape of Good Hope and across the Atlantic Ocean. Exploration and
adventure, the invasion of Mexico and the Americas as well as the
Orient, the search for gold and for happiness went hand in hand.
At the same time Luther roused northern Europe with his demand
for religious reform and founded the Protestant church. In England
Shakespeare and his companions had discovered a new field of literary
venture and produced plays by the hundred, many of them immortal. The
modern world of action and progress had at last come of age.

The passing of the old ideals, of chivalry and monkish study, is
nowhere better shown than in "Don Quixote." The love of creative art
hand in hand with adventure echoes through every page of Cellini's
"Autobiography." Francis Bacon discovered a new method of reasoning;
Montaigne did what had not been thought of for hundreds of years, and
began to study his own personality, the workings of his mind, and the
problems which he found in his own life within himself; Sir Thomas
More also took up a subject that had not been touched for seventeen
centuries and drew a wonderful picture of an ideal government in his
"Utopia." Columbus and a whole squadron of others sailed the unknown
seas. The Elizabethan nobles, like Sir Philip Sidney and Sir Walter
Raleigh, were poets, statesmen, courtiers, and generals all at once.

  POETRY

  Michelangelo
  Ronsard
  Shakespeare
  Spenser
  Villon

  FICTION

  Cervantes
  Rabelais

  HISTORY

  Holinshed
  Raleigh

  BIOGRAPHY

  Cellini

  DRAMA

  Jonson
  Marlowe
  Shakespeare

  PHILOSOPHY
  & SCIENCE

  Ascham
  Bacon
  Luther
  Machiavelli
  Montaigne
  More
  Sidney

=The Age of Classicism.= 1600-1776. By 1600 imagination and the
creative spirit were running riot. The exuberance of wonder and
discovery had led to a wordy and confused style of writing. It was
time for this unbalanced disorderly manner to be subjected to sound
criticism and to be regulated by laws of composition.

This is precisely what happened. Enthusiasm and inventive power
were wearied, and thinking men began to criticize and judge the
work that was being done. It was clear to them that there was need
of proportion and symmetry, that each act of a play, for example,
should do its special part in the development of the plot and in the
revelation of the characters. The problem in the scholar's mind was:
What is the best possible form or model to follow in making a play, a
song, or a speech? Wise men came to the conclusion that the classic
authors of ancient literature furnished the best examples, and this
is why the period is called the Age of Classicism.

It was characterized by the use of reason and judgment, rather than
feeling and inspiration, by convention and law, by restraint and
dignity. In fact the wilder side of nature was actually disliked;
the Alps were not grand, but barbaric and odious, in the eyes of the
literary men of that day. Dr. Johnson, in his famous Dictionary,
defines a mountain as "a protuberance on the face of nature." The
rich land-owners altered the landscapes on their great estates,
smoothed out the inelegances of the meadows, cut trees down and
planted others, laid out geometrically correct roads and paths, and
altogether 'improved' nature until the whole scene was thoroughly
artificial; very trim and neat, but very unnatural.

In literature it was much the same. Poetry, such as Pope's, seems
stilted and affected to us; the plays of Racine, the opposite of
Shakespeare's, are formal and long-winded, so exalted in tone and
so restrained in their phrasing that they are dignity indeed, but
nothing else.

Yet the movement was beneficial because it cut away the extravagances
of the earlier period. It also produced a new branch of literature,
the critical essay. The essays of Bacon and Montaigne had been
philosophical. Those of Addison and Steele dealt with life and
literature critically, using fable and fiction to give point to their
verdicts in enforcement of law and convention.

But writing based on the ancient classics demanded a highly educated
public. Only the wealthy could obtain the education necessary.
Besides, the aristocracy held that the common people should be kept
in their place, that learning and scholarship were not for them.
The life of thought and progress was remote from the mass of the
population, just as the government was carried on without reference
to their needs or wishes.

  POETRY

  Dryden
  Goldsmith
  Gray
  Herbert[1]
  Milton[1]
  Pope

  FICTION

  Bunyan[1]
  Defoe
  Fénelon
  Fielding
  Goldsmith
  Johnson
  Le Sage
  Sterne
  Swift

  HISTORY & ORATORY

  Burke
  Gibbon

  ESSAY & BIOG.

  Addison
  Boswell
  Steele
  Voltaire

  DRAMA

  Calderon
  Lessing
  Molière
  Racine
  Sheridan

  RELIGION & PHILOSOPHY

  Browne[1]
  Bunyan[1]
  Herbert[1]
  Kant
  Smith, A.
  Watts
  Wesley


=The Age of Romanticism.= 1776-1832. The Revolution in America, soon
followed by that in France, is the historical sign of the passing
of the aristocratic spirit of classicism. Freedom, equality, the
destruction of the bondage that had held the common people back from
education and advancement, these are the new ideas. In literature as
in life a reaction broke out against the formal, stilted, unemotional
style of classicism. Wordsworth and Byron in England, Rousseau in
France, and Goethe and Schiller in Germany were the leaders in
the intellectual activity. Their writings and their principles
were directly opposed to their predecessors. Liberty, instead of
convention; free expression of passion and feeling, in the place
of cold reasoning; individual expression instead of imitation and
studied restraint; simple words and direct, clear statement in the
place of an affected and artificial style; a love for the wild and
picturesque in scenery rather than for the smooth and cultivated
parks of the past century. Contrast Byron with Pope, or Scott's
novels with Johnson's "Rasselas" to see the radical difference in
tone.

This outburst of freedom and self-expression meant progress. To
increase the advance, steam and machinery came into use; just as
printing accomplished marvels in the days of the Renaissance, so
now there was again a blaze of creative genius and inventiveness.
National education at the expense of the state and the growth of
newspapers and magazines put rich and poor, noble and peasant more
nearly on a level than any bloodshed or lawmaking could ever have
done.

  POETRY

  Blake
  Burns
  Byron
  Coleridge
  Keats
  Musset
  Shelley
  Uhland
  Wordsworth

  FICTION

  Chateaubriand
  Fouqué
  Hugo
  Manzoni
  Scott

  ESSAY

  De Quincey
  Hazlitt
  Heine
  Lamb
  Richter
  Southey

  DRAMA

  Goethe
  Schiller

  PHILOSOPHY

  Rousseau
  Schopenhauer

=The Nineteenth Century=. The first glow of the romantic enthusiasm
soon died away and the new forces of industry and commerce took
possession of Europe and America.

But the swift onrush of manufacturing and trading called for armies
of accountants, skilled workers, and salesmen. These made up a new
class of society; hitherto there had been aristocrats and peasants,
educated and ignorant, rich and poor. The army of business employees,
alert, vigorous, ready for any quantity of reading-matter that would
amuse or furnish knowledge, added their countless numbers to the
reading public. Fiction, at first in the novel, and later in the
short story, was published as fast as it could be printed. This great
middle class itself provided material for genius to work on. Dickens
and George Eliot are striking examples of authors who wrote about
this new middle class in order to amuse it. The influence of business
life made the world more matter of fact and in consequence literature
became rather more prosaic, with a tendency to present a realistic
picture of everyday life and manners. Science, aided by a multitude
of mechanical inventions, made unprecedented progress and assumed a
more important place in the minds of men than ever before. History
was treated scientifically, thought was more systematic than ever,
the nineteenth century presented a union of the enthusiasm of the
Renaissance, the love of system of the Classic Age, and the devotion
to nature of the Romantic Period.

The following lists have been selected from the great array of
nineteenth-century authors with the view of presenting those whose
work has been peculiarly significant of the period.

  POETRY

  Arnold, M.
  Browning, E. B.
  Browning, R.
  Bryant
  Longfellow
  Lowell
  Morris, W.
  Poe
  Rossetti
  Swinburne
  Tennyson
  Whitman

  FICTION

  Austen
  Balzac
  Dickens
  Dumas
  Eliot
  Hardy
  Harte
  Hawthorne
  Irving
  Kipling
  Poe
  Stevenson
  Thackeray
  Tolstoi
  Zola

  HISTORY

  Bancroft
  Carlyle
  Ferrero
  Green
  Guizot
  Hodgkin
  Michelet
  Mommsen
  Motley
  Parkman
  Prescott
  Symonds
  Taine

  ESSAY & BIOG.

  Arnold, M.
  Chesterton
  Emerson
  La Ramée
  Lewes
  Lockhart
  Lowell
  Morley
  Pater
  Sainte-Beuve
  Stephen
  Thoreau
  Villari

  PHILOSOPHY & SCIENCE

  Carlyle
  Darwin
  Emerson
  Galton
  Hamilton
  Ruskin
  Shaler
  Spencer

  RELIGION

  Bowne
  Brierley
  Brooks
  Channing
  Robertson




NATIONAL CHARACTERISTICS


Each of the nations, like each of the great eras of human progress,
possesses definite characteristics of its own. Frenchmen differ from
Englishmen in their faces, their customs, and also in intellectual
trend. Shakespeare is unlike Ibsen not simply because he lived at an
earlier date, in another epoch, but also because he was the native
of another country. Kipling's point of view is not the same as that
of Thomas Bailey Aldrich; their national traditions and surroundings
varied sufficiently to leave a mark upon their work so legible that
one is recognized as English and the other as American without need
of referring to their biographies.

It is necessary, then, to have in mind the traits that individualize
nations and races. For this reason the national characteristics are
here set forth briefly, with lists of the principal authors of each
country.

=Greek Literature.= An unequaled perception of beauty, with a love of
symmetry and proportion: the reason and the feelings, the intellect
and the emotions are perfectly blended. The powers of imagination
and creation are highly trained, as well as the logical faculty,
resulting in the perfection of skill and insight in epic poetry
(Homer), tragedy (Æschylus, Euripides, and Sophocles), and philosophy
(Plato).

  POETRY

  Cleanthes
  Homer
  Pindar
  Sappho
  Theocritus

  FICTION

  Æsop

  HISTORY

  Herodotus
  Thucydides

  BIOGRAPHY

  Plato
  Plutarch

  DRAMA

  Æschylus
  Euripides
  Sophocles

  PHILOSOPHY

  Epictetus
  Plato

=Latin Literature.= The power of organization, with an ardor for
law and order, combined with a genius for adapting and utilizing
the best products of the nations which came under the Roman rule.
This talent for adaptation and imitation stands in contrast to the
Greek creative talent. Inasmuch as Rome's greatest literary works
belong to a period four centuries after the best Greek production, it
follows that the Roman authors profited not only by Greek achievement
but also by the increased knowledge of the world due to the vast
extension of the Roman Empire. Apart from this broader point of
view, Latin authors borrowed method and style from the Greek; Vergil
follows Homer and Theocritus, who was also imitated by Horace. Cicero
and Seneca took both thought and style from Greek philosophers. In
fact, Athens was the university at which all well-educated Romans had
studied.

  POETRY

  Catullus
  Horace
  Ovid
  Vergil

  FICTION

  Apuleius

  HISTORY

  Cæsar
  Josephus[2]
  Livy
  Suetonius
  Tacitus

  BIOGRAPHY

  Pliny

  PHILOSOPHY

  Aurelius
  Cicero
  Lucretius
  Seneca

=English Literature.= England's isolation as an island has enabled
her to develop a national literature continuously for nine centuries
with only the slightest interruption from the world without. Foreign
ideas have been introduced, certainly, but by Englishmen instead of
by foreigners. Where a slothful race would have lain dormant and
inactive, the vigorous and adventurous islanders have even led the
way in two fields of literary endeavor, for fiction and the essay
reached their successive stages of growth more quickly in England
than elsewhere. Throughout poetry and prose, with but few exceptions,
there is a blend of shrewdness and inspiration which in daily life
is called common sense; Chaucer, Shakespeare, Milton, Browning
continually sound the practical note, evincing their knowledge and
appreciation of material affairs. Another trait is that of searching
out the moral lessons in life and thought. "Books in the running
brooks, sermons in stones" are constantly sought by English authors.
Chaucer, Bunyan, Milton, Dickens, Carlyle, Browning, and many others
from the forefront of English letters play the part of teacher and
preacher again and again.

  POETRY

  Anglo-Saxon
  Literature
  Arnold, M.
  Blake
  Browning, E. B.
  Browning, R.
  Burns
  Byron
  Chaucer
  Clough
  Coleridge
  Dryden
  Goldsmith
  Gray
  Henley
  Keats
  Kingsley
  Macaulay
  Milton
  Morris, W.
  Old English Ballads
  Patmore
  Pope
  Rossetti, C.
  Rossetti, D. G.
  Scott
  Shakespeare
  Shelley
  Sidney
  Spenser
  Swinburne
  Tennyson
  Wordsworth

  FICTION

  Austen
  Barrie
  Blackmore
  Borrow
  Brontë
  Caine
  Defoe
  Dickens
  Doyle
  Eliot
  Fielding
  Gaskell
  Goldsmith
  Hardy
  Hughes
  Kingsley
  Kipling
  Lever
  Lytton
  Macdonald
  Macleod
  Malory
  Meredith
  Reade
  Richardson
  Scott
  Stevenson
  Swift
  Thackeray
  Watson

  HISTORY

  Carlyle
  Creasy
  Farrar
  Freeman
  Froissart
  Froude
  Gibbon
  Gladstone
  Green
  Grote
  Hodgkin
  Holinshed
  McCarthy
  Mahaffy
  Raleigh
  Smith, G.
  Symonds

  BIOGRAPHY

  Boswell
  Chesterton
  Evelyn
  Lewes
  Lockhart
  Pepys
  Southey

  ESSAY

  Addison
  Arnold, M.
  Bacon
  Benson
  De Quincey
  Hamerton
  Harrison
  Hazlitt
  Lamb
  Lang
  La Ramée
  Macaulay
  Milton
  Morley
  Pater
  Ruskin
  Sidney
  Steele
  Stephen
  Stevenson
  Thackeray
  Walton
  White, G.

  HUMOR

  Barham
  Carroll
  Cowper
  Dickens
  Gilbert
  Hood
  Hope
  Jerrold
  Sterne
  Swift
  Thackeray

  TRAVEL

  Hearn
  Kinglake
  Mandeville
  Stevenson
  Tyndall

  DRAMA

  Jonson
  Marlowe
  Shakespeare
  Sheridan

  ORATORY

  Bright
  Burke

  SCIENCE
  & PHILOSOPHY

  Bacon
  Carlyle
  Darwin
  Galton
  Mill
  More
  Ruskin
  Smith, A.
  Spencer

  RELIGION

  Bonar
  Bowring
  Brierley
  Browne, Sir T.
  Cowper
  Faber
  Heber
  Herbert
  Hooker
  Keble
  Lyte
  Milman
  Newman
  Robertson
  Toplady
  Watts
  Wesley
  Wyclif

=American Literature.= Obviously akin to English literature,
yet more democratic in tone, owing to national tendencies, such
as the character of the settlers, and the subsequent historical
developments. Longfellow, Emerson, Whitman, and the other
leading American authors wrote for the nation and not for any
restricted class; the aristocratic note characteristic of much of
eighteenth-century English literature is not to be found in American
writers.

  POETRY

  Aldrich
  Bryant
  Emerson
  Field
  Holmes
  Howe
  Key
  Lanier
  Longfellow
  Lowell
  Morris, G. P.
  Payne
  Poe
  Read
  Riley
  Smith, S. F.
  Story
  Taylor
  Whitman
  Whittier
  Woodworth

  FICTION

  Aldrich
  Cooper
  Crawford
  Hale
  Harte
  Hawthorne
  Irving
  Poe
  Stowe

  HISTORY

  Bancroft
  Fiske
  Irving
  McMaster
  Motley
  Parkman
  Prescott

  ESSAY

  Emerson
  Fields
  Howells
  Lowell
  Mitchell
  Thoreau
  Warner

  HUMOR

  Browne, C. F.
  Harris
  Harte
  Holmes
  Irving
  Lowell

  TRAVEL

  Audubon
  Dana
  Melville

  ORATORY

  Choate
  Henry
  Lincoln
  Phillips
  Sumner
  Washington
  Webster

  SCIENCE
  & PHILOSOPHY

  Emerson
  Hamilton
  Shaler

  RELIGION

  Bowne
  Brooks
  Channing
  Palmer
  Sears

=French Literature.= A marked love of beauty, almost Greek in its
nature, with a feeling for accuracy and organization which is
decidedly Latin. These qualities have produced delicacy and clearness
of expression; but their tendencies lead to perfection of style and
form rather than to depth of thought, giving an effect of lightness
and brilliance, and at times of superficiality.

  POETRY

  French Lit.
  La Fontaine
  Musset
  Ronsard
  Rouget de Lisle
  Verlaine
  Villon

  FICTION

  Balzac
  Bernardin de
  Saint-Pierre
  Chateaubriand
  Daudet
  Dumas
  Fénelon
  Feuillet
  French Lit.
  Hugo
  Laboulaye
  Le Sage
  Maupassant
  Perrault
  Zola

  HISTORY

  French Lit.
  Guizot
  Michelet
  Taine
  Voltaire

  ESSAY

  Montaigne
  Sainte-Beuve

  DRAMA

  Molière
  Racine
  Rostand

  PHILOSOPHY

  Pascal
  Rousseau

  RELIGION

  Bernard, St.
  Bernard of Cluny

=German Literature.= Depth of thought and forceful expression,
which are in part responsible for the complex character of the
national style as opposed to the clarity of the French. Owing to
the unsettled condition of Germany for many centuries, the arts in
general, and literature especially, did not begin to flourish to a
noteworthy degree until the eighteenth century. While Luther was the
first great author to use the language in its present form, it was
not until two centuries later that the next eminent writers, Lessing,
Schiller, and Goethe, appeared, whose work marks the highest point in
the history of German letters.

  POETRY

  Arndt
  German Lit.
  Goethe
  Heine
  Schneckenburger
  Uhland

  FICTION

  Fouqué
  Grimm
  Raspe

  HISTORY

  Mommsen

  DRAMA

  Lessing
  Schiller
  Goethe

  PHILOSOPHY

  Kant
  Schopenhauer

  RELIGION

  à Kempis
  Luther

=Italian Literature.= Emotional and imaginative rather than
reflective, and therefore at its best in the brilliant and exuberant
era of the Renaissance, which first came into full bloom in Italy.

  POETRY

  Dante
  Jacopone
  Michelangelo
  Petrarch
  Tasso

  FICTION

  Boccaccio
  Manzoni

  HISTORY

  Ferrero

  TRAVEL
  & BIOG.

  Cellini
  Pellico
  Polo
  Villari

  PHILOSOPHY

  Machiavelli

  RELIGION

  Jacopone
  Mazzini
  Thomas of Celano

=Spanish Literature.= Marked by the dignity that is the predominating
characteristic of the nation. Just as Spain has had but one brief
period when she was supreme among the European nations, so she has
produced but one supreme author, Cervantes. Her literature, for the
most part, and notably at the present day, is imitative, behind
rather than ahead of the times.

  POETRY

  Spanish Lit.

  FICTION

  Cervantes

  DRAMA

  Calderon

=Scandinavian Literature.= Norway, Sweden, and Denmark are nations
of the same race; their history, literature, and civilization are
inseparably associated. Climate, racial character, historical
developments, and other causes have combined to retard the growth of
their literature. Apart from the sagas little of universal interest
appeared until the nineteenth century, in which Ibsen created a
sensation with his dramas of relentless criticism of the vanity and
pettiness of life in the prosperous, democratic society of Norway.

  POETRY

  Ewald
  Norse Lit.

  FICTION

  Andersen
  Björnson

  HISTORY

  Norse Lit.

  DRAMA

  Ibsen

=Russian Literature.= In some respects more closely related to the
East than to the West, and hampered by despotism until the twentieth
century, Russia produced nothing of value until a century ago. The
novelists mentioned below then began a series of vivid pictures of
the struggle for freedom, knowledge, and civilization as opposed to
tyranny, universal ignorance, and barbarism. Their work has a strong
national flavor, coupled with a youthful energy and an enthusiasm
for the mission of enlightenment that recalls the spirit of the
Renaissance and its zeal for discovery and progress.

  POETRY

  Derzhavin

  FICTION

  Russian Lit.
  Sienkiewicz
  Tolstoi
  Turgenieff

=Oriental Literature.= Arabia, Persia, India, China, and Japan
live and think along lines utterly at variance with our mode of
life. Their points of difference from each other are by no means as
distinct as the radical contrast between their customs and ours.
As we all know, Arabic and Hebrew are written from right to left,
so that a book's first page corresponds to the last page with us;
in China and Japan people write down the page in vertical columns.
Again, with us energy and activity, wisely used, form the basis of
our life and our religion, whereas in the Orient it is held best
to abstain from all action, to lead a life of absolute quiet and
inactivity, if possible.

It follows that the literature of the East is first of all
exceedingly difficult to translate well and in the second place is
not to be judged in the same fashion as Western writings.

  POETRY

  Hafiz
  Omar Khayyám
  Sadi

  FICTION

  Arabian Nights
  Jewish Lit.

  HISTORY

  Japanese Lit.
  Josephus[3]

  RELIGION

  Confucius
  Hindoo Lit.
  Jewish Lit.
  Mohammed




THE DIVISIONS OF LITERATURE


Poetry, history, the novel, the short story, the essay, and other
branches of literature have all passed through successive stages
of change and progress. To trace one of these divisions from its
beginnings is not only interesting, but affords an excellent method
of study, easily carried out and immediately beneficial. The novel
of to-day, for example, is the product of centuries of authorship,
in which various elements were gradually blended; the contributions
of Cervantes, Defoe, Addison, and Scott, extending over a space of
two hundred and thirty years, have each played a decisive part in its
formation. So it is with history, poetry, and the rest of the forms
of intellectual expression. The origin and nature of each of these
divisions is considered in the pages that follow, with the usual
lists and examples under each heading.


POETRY

How did poetry originate? In every nation the beginnings of its
literature have been poems. This highest form of literary expression
is also the oldest; it is not the final triumphant product of a
highly civilized age, after centuries of slow development and gradual
growth of power and art in the use of words. It is exactly the
opposite; the earliest authors are the poets who sang and chanted the
brave deeds of the leaders of their nation; the "Iliad," the Norse
sagas, the "Song of Roland" are well-known examples of this primitive
yet glorious poetry. But why is this, that one of the greatest of the
arts should be already highly perfected in barbaric times? Because
poetry rests on two principles: it is imaginative in its nature and
rhythmic in its form. Man's imagination stirred him to conquest for
the sake of glory and dominion, and then his imagination was again
roused to tell in words of splendid imagery of his honor and fame
and valor, of loveliness and happiness and power. Man's instinct for
the regular cadence that he heard in the tramp of marching feet led
him to chant aloud in firm, even measure while the words he sang
fitted themselves to the beat of his music. It was only a slight
matter to vary the length of the lines or group them in stanzas or
use rhyme in order to increase the beauty of verse construction.
However, the true test of poetry has always been the value of its
imaginative power; no matter how accurate or elaborate its form,
unless it expresses great ideas it cannot rank as great poetry, but
merely as good verse. Like all art, poetry is the expression of
genuine feeling in beautiful form. (See Sidney's "Defense of Poesy.")


THE CHIEF DIVISIONS OF POETRY

=Epic poetry= tells the story of a great sequence of events, such as
the wanderings and home-coming of Odysseus, in the "Odyssey." It is
the earliest form of literature and one of the grandest. No great
period or nation has failed to produce its epic.

For examples in Ancient Literature see "The Epic of Pentaur" under
Egyptian Literature; Homer; and Vergil. The works of the last two are
known as 'heroic epics.'

In the Dark Ages: "Beowulf" under Anglo-Saxon Literature; "The Song
of Roland" under French Literature; "The Nibelungenlied" under German
Literature; "The Saga of Eric the Red" under Norse Literature; and
"The Chronicle of the Cid" under Spanish Literature.

In the Middle Ages: Dante and Tasso, who wrote 'sacred epics.' The
"Old English Ballads" are excellent examples of the shorter poetic
tales from which such epics as the "Iliad," the "Nibelungenlied," and
the "Song of Roland" were built up.

In the Renaissance: Spenser, whose "Faerie Queene" is an epic of
chivalry. Milton's great epics of "Paradise Lost" and "Paradise
Regained" are sacred epics, reflecting the Puritan influence that
came over England at the close of the period.

In the Age of Classicism: the mock-epic of Pope's "Rape of the Lock,"
and the epic tale in prose, "Telemachus," by Fénelon.

In the Age of Romanticism: Scott's "Lady of the Lake," and Byron's
"Childe Harold's Pilgrimage," although this last is perhaps best
regarded as a study of the poet's emotions upon visiting the grandest
scenes in Europe.

In Nineteenth Century Literature: Longfellow's "Evangeline" and
"Hiawatha" are short epics. Owing to the central, unifying figure of
King Arthur, Tennyson's "Idylls of the King" have much of the epic
effect.

=Lyric poetry= includes all verse that presents the poet's feelings
and passions; it is characterized also by plentiful use of varied
ideas, rich and fanciful imagery, and rhythmical flow of language.

From the beginning there were shorter songs, as well as the epic,
often accompanied on the lyre, a small harp, from which this branch
of poetry takes its name. To-day lyric poetry tends toward a lighter
tone and spirit than in the Romantic Period; in length it may vary
very widely, from the little quatrain, of four lines, to an ode or
a ballad of almost epic extent. Burns, Milton, Moore, Byron, Keats,
Shelley, Shakespeare, and Wordsworth are among the foremost in this
field; among the ancients Catullus, Horace, and Sappho are prominent;
while the writings of Goethe, Heine, Uhland, Longfellow, Whittier,
Browning, Tennyson, and Swinburne contain many that are familiar.
Musical accompaniment is no longer essential. There are several forms
of the lyric, chief among which are the following:

  The Ode, addressed to a person or a personified idea or else
  expressing the poet's emotions at a moment of great exaltation.
  In form it either follows a varying sequence of lines of
  irregular length or else employs a series of uniform stanzas.
  Illustrative of the former are Dryden's "Alexander's Feast"
  and "A Song for St. Cecilia's Day," and Wordsworth's "Ode on
  Intimations of Immortality"; among the latter are Collins's "Ode
  to Evening," Keats's "Ode to a Nightingale" and "Ode on a Grecian
  Urn," Shelley's "Ode to the West Wind" and "To a Skylark," and
  Wordsworth's "To the Cuckoo" and "Ode to Duty."

  The Sonnet, of Italian origin, was brought to its perfection
  by Petrarch; it consists of fourteen lines of equal length
  (in English usually of ten syllables), the first eight lines
  constituting the _octave_ and the last six, the _sestet_. In
  the octave the rhymes are arranged _a b b a a b b a_, and in
  the sestet, either _c d c d c d_ or _c d e c d e_. The sonnet
  should contain one idea, which may be treated from two points of
  view, in the octave and sestet respectively. As used by Milton
  and later poets in England this double treatment was not often
  observed and there is no break of thought at the end of the
  octave. Owing to its restrictions the sonnet is considered one
  of the most difficult forms in which to achieve distinction,
  as metrical ingenuity without sublimity of thought bars mere
  versifiers. The most noted examples by English authors are E.
  B. Browning's "Sonnets from the Portuguese," Keats's "On First
  Looking into Chapman's Homer," Milton's "On His Blindness,"
  Shelley's "England in 1819," and those selected from Wordsworth.

  The Ballad, partaking somewhat of the epic, is a tale in verse,
  usually arranged in short stanzas. "Old English Ballads,"
  Cowper's "The Diverting History of John Gilpin," Drayton's
  "Ballad of Agincourt," and Rossetti's "The White Ship" are
  specimens of this form. It originated among the peasantry, who
  commemorated the prowess of their favorite heroes in rough verse
  sung by the cottage hearth.

  The Elegy is devoted to the memory of the dead and therefore is
  grave and stately in its metrical form as well as in thought.
  Gray's "Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard," Milton's
  "Lycidas," Shelley's "Adonais," and Tennyson's "In Memoriam" are
  the most famous.

=Idyllic poetry= briefly presents a picture, complete and lovely,
usually pastoral and romantic. Tennyson's "Idylls of the King,"
Goldsmith's "Deserted Village," the Idylls of Theocritus, and the
Eclogues of Vergil are the best examples.

=Dramatic poetry=, in which the form of a play or drama is used, has
always been chosen for the deepest and most majestic presentations
of the problems and wonders of human life. The dramatic poets of
the ancients as well as those of modern times rank among the most
far-seeing thinkers and ablest writers of the world. No philosopher
or historian has ever been able to reach the people or express the
profoundest reflections so readily and forcibly.

The tragedies of Æschylus, Euripides, and Sophocles, with those of
Shakespeare and the "Faust" of Goethe, are the highest achievements
in literature; their effect, from the stage, is instantaneous, and
even in reading them the mind receives a direct impression of wonder
and awe not elsewhere given. The Greek tragedies mentioned above
have for their underlying theme the power of relentless fate, the
inevitable omnipotence of right, and the final destruction of wrong
and falsehood. In these and "Macbeth," "Hamlet," and "King Lear"
the mastery of plot and action is superb; the play gathers force
and momentum until the catastrophe sweeps down upon the evil-doers
and unfortunates like a tidal wave. Yet each step in its progress,
even the least trifle, is so natural as to seem unavoidable. Here
is the proof of the poet's genius, in that he selects the message
to be presented to his audience or readers, chooses his characters,
and outlines his plot, then combines the three elements with such
skill and with such inspiration as to leave an effect of perfect
truth and actuality. Aristotle, the ancient philosopher and critic,
declared that the very souls of the audience were cleansed and rid of
pettiness and self-seeking by beholding such works as these; that the
spectacle of disaster brought down upon men by their own vanity and
wrong-doing, and portrayed in language of such vivid grandeur, was
the most impressive means of reaching the hearts of men.

In addition to the authors mentioned above, Calderon, Jonson,
Lessing, Marlowe, Molière, Racine, Rostand, and Schiller have made
notable contributions to the poetic drama. (See also Drama, p. 49.)


FICTION

The practice of telling tales of love and heroism is older than
history itself. Ever since men sat about the fire of an evening and
recited the deeds of their chieftains or extolled the beauty of
their princesses, in other words, ever since the days when poetry
first began, stories and tales have been handed down, first by word
of mouth, then by carvings and inscriptions and at last by writing
and printing. The first fiction was a simple, imaginative invention
of adventure, told to pass the time. Æsop's "Fables" and Apuleius's
"Story of Cupid and Psyche," ancient as they are, show the progress
already made in the art of narration, the one simple and insistent
in its purpose of teaching common sense by whimsical anecdotes, the
other a delicately artistic legend told with exquisite grace. In
"Jewish Literature" the story of Tobit's wonderful adventures at once
calls to mind the "Arabian Nights," which were of similar origin,
told by professional story-tellers for centuries before they were
finally written down and translated for our perpetual delight.

=The novel=, a new feature in fiction, shows its first faint
beginnings in the tumult and enthusiasm of the Renaissance, that
strenuous age of new ideas and discoveries. Cervantes in writing "Don
Quixote" had a definite purpose in mind beyond mere entertainment;
the passing of the age of chivalry and the pathos and humor of life
form the true subject of his tale. Bunyan in the "Pilgrim's Progress"
shows the same intent of doing something more than providing
interesting reading; the growth of a noble character through struggle
and temptation on the journey through life is the central thought
of his work. His hero, Christian, changes in character, becoming a
stronger, better man as the story goes on. Defoe's Robinson Crusoe
goes through much of the same evolution. And this is the underlying
principle of the novel, that it has a purpose beyond simple
story-telling, possessing a plot or unified succession of incidents,
with actors whose characters develop. It is a picture of human life,
with strength and weakness, happiness and misery, all bound together
and forming a united and well-proportioned whole.

However, it was not until Addison and Steele, in the "Spectator"
essays, had shown such skill in drawing characters and depicting
manners and customs that the time was ripe for the true novel to
appear. For one of the chief duties of the novel is to criticize
life, to furnish comment on the social conditions and tendencies of
the day. Among the earliest and also the greatest of the English
novelists, Fielding, whose work appeared about thirty years after the
"Spectator," not only draws sturdy and truthful pictures of the life
of his day, but also makes the reader see the true value of that life
and estimate its good and its bad qualities. In the same way Dickens
and Thackeray, not very long after, supplied unending amusement and
fun for the world and at the same time did far more by making the
nations sit up and think, pointing out with almost brutal clearness
the need of unselfish action and the love of truth and simplicity.
There is not a novel of high rank but contains more than meets the
eye at first glance. It is the readiest means of putting a critical
estimate of history, of life and society, directly before the world.

NOVELS AND GENERAL FICTION

  Austen
  Balzac
  Beaconsfield
  Blackmore
  Borrow
  Brontë
  Bunyan
  Caine
  Cervantes
  Chateaubriand
  Cooper
  Daudet
  Defoe
  Dickens
  Doyle
  Dumas
  Fénelon
  Feuillet
  Fielding
  Gaskell
  Goldsmith
  Hugo
  Kingsley
  Le Sage
  Lever
  Lytton
  Macdonald
  Manzoni
  Meredith
  Reade
  Richardson
  Scott
  Shorthouse
  Sienkiewicz
  Stowe
  Thackeray
  Turgenieff
  Zola

=The short story=, as distinct from a story that is short, is a
nineteenth-century development in fiction. During the last hundred
years the magazines grew so rapidly in numbers and circulation that
they could not depend entirely on continued stories; they had to
have tales that would be complete in one number, which could be read
at one sitting. The demand brought the needed solution, a story
which instead of length, with intricate action and complex studies
of personality, supplied rapid action, brilliantly imaginative
description, and a terse portrayal of character. Scenes, persons,
and events were stamped immediately on the reader's mind; the effect
desired by the writer was attained by force and bold decision. Edgar
Allan Poe was one of the first to excel in this field, utilizing his
critical powers as well as sheer inspiration to meet the situation.

The variations in style and manner are as manifold in the short story
as in the novel. Boccaccio, "The Arabian Nights," French Literature,
and the "Gesta Romanorum" show the work of the Middle Ages, from mere
anecdote with a moral tagged on, in the "Gesta," to the graceful
prose poem of "Aucassin and Nicolete." Barrie, Brown, and Hawthorne
do little more than draw quiet sketches of simple life, while
Björnson, Eliot, Hardy, Harte, Irving, Kipling, Macleod, Maupassant,
Stevenson, and Tolstoi deal powerfully with situations that bring
home to us the force of fate which lurks hidden in petty incidents.
Aldrich, Collins, Crawford, Hale, and Watson have all used this type
of fiction effectively. Indeed, Hale's "Man Without a Country" drives
home the idea of patriotism so vigorously that Italy recently issued
a translation in an edition of a million copies for distribution to
her army.


HISTORY

Like poetry and fiction, history emerges from the darkness of the
unknown ages, at first no more than a boastful record of slaughter
and usurpation, such as shows through the gloss and splendor of epic
poetry. The sagas in "Norse Literature," the crisp record of invasion
and conquest by Cæsar, and that of Josephus on the Roman conquest of
the Jews are all of this type, a chronicle by an eyewitness of the
succession of deeds that made up some event in a nation's life.

An improvement came with Herodotus in ancient times and again with
Froissart in the Middle Ages. Both of these historians added zest
to their tale by including some account of the principal personages
as well as picturesque, well-drawn pictures of the scene. In other
words, they filled in the background of their pictures, their wars
were waged by people with definite personalities and in a country
with certain individual features and peculiarities.

From this method to the modern scientific style was a further
advance. It is now understood that we must perceive the growth of
a nation, its social changes, its increase of intellectual as well
as physical power, its innermost secrets of success or failure.
Thucydides, the Greek historian, and Tacitus, the Roman, felt
something of this and have left us far more than a mere list of
battles and rulers. Gibbon, in "The Decline and Fall of the Roman
Empire," and later still, Guizot, Mommsen, and Ferrero, have carried
on the work of analyzing the complex mysteries of history and
civilization and have brought it to its highest development. The more
stirring visions of heroism and kingly dominion have been replaced by
pages in which not an emperor but a nation is born, passes through
childhood to maturity and wisdom, succumbs to disease or an enemy's
murderous attacks, and perishes.

The study of history nowadays may involve the scholar in years of
drudgery, such as searching out and listing the exports and imports
of the city of London between the years 1340 and 1400. However,
the conclusions drawn from his discoveries may be of world-wide
importance. The questions of tariff reform, wage-scales, taxation,
and representative government will all be affected by the data which
his scientific investigation will have brought to light. Those of us
whose life-work lies in other directions can give no attention to
the details of toilsome labor like this. But the results must always
be significant for us. The great movements in the troublous advance
of the nations from barbarism to civilization are full of lessons
which we must learn. History, regarded as a series of wars, an
unceasing fury of bloodshed and misgovernment, is of slight interest
to peace-loving people. But history as a series of pictures, showing
the conditions of life in various ages and countries, picturing the
spread of liberty and equality, and the slow yet sure increase of
justice--history viewed in this manner is one of the most stirring
and educative subjects for reading and study.

How was the Roman Empire built up? What was the condition of the
people in the days of Homer? How did the ancient tribes live from
which the German nation is descended? What was England like in
Shakespeare's time? These are some of the questions which we should
ask. Many of the ablest brains in Europe and America have spent their
lives in finding out the answers.

The following lists group the historians according to the nation
which they discuss.

  GREECE

  Froude
  Gladstone
  Grote
  Herodotus
  Mahaffy
  Plutarch
  Thucydides

  ROME

  Cæsar
  Farrar
  Ferrero
  Freeman
  Gibbon
  Hodgkin
  Josephus
  Livy
  Mommsen
  Pliny
  Suetonius
  Tacitus

  ENGLAND

  Cæsar
  Creasy
  Evelyn
  Froissart
  Green
  Holinshed
  McCarthy
  Pepys
  Raleigh
  Smith, G.
  Southey
  Taine

  AMERICA

  Bancroft
  Fiske
  Irving
  McMaster
  Parkman

  FRANCE

  Cæsar
  Carlyle
  Creasy
  French Lit.
  Froissart
  Michelet
  Parkman

  ITALY

  Cellini
  Hodgkin
  Symonds
  Villari


  SPAIN

  Creasy
  Prescott
  Spanish Lit.

Egyptian Literature, Guizot's "History of Civilization in Europe,"
Japanese Literature, Josephus on the conquest of the Jews by Rome,
Motley's "Relief of Leyden," Norse Literature, Tacitus's "Customs of
the Germans," and Voltaire's account of Charles XII of Sweden are
other selections.


BIOGRAPHY

The lives of great men have always been of interest not merely for
the sake of satisfying curiosity, but because of the value of further
knowledge about their habits, thoughts, and actions. The personality
of a great man attracts us; perhaps through reading an intimate
account of his life we may see into the reasons for his superiority,
possibly we may find the key to the secret of power. So much can be
learned from biography that it seems absurd how little importance
is given to the subject even in our best colleges. Yet Christianity
rests upon the life and teachings of one Personality, nation after
nation has been saved or ruined by the deeds of one individual,
wisdom and contentment have been found by the great minds of the
world. By considering their lives, their principles, their virtues,
and their failings we can get an extraordinary insight into the
problems of happiness and wholesome living. Carlyle rightly called a
Great Man "the most precious gift that Heaven can give to the Earth;
a man of 'genius' as we call it; the Soul of a Man actually sent down
from the skies with a God's-message to us." To see such a man at his
work, at his play, thinking, dreaming, attaining greatness little by
little or in a flash, to spend hours with him in thought, learning
from him or from his friends and critics wherein he proved his power
and how he labored to express it: to be in such close touch with one
of the giants of the earth is a privilege which we must not dare to
neglect. The opportunity is ours, ours be the blame and the failure
if we neglect it.

  Boswell
  Cellini
  Chesterton
  Eckermann
  Evelyn
  Fields
  Franklin
  Lewes
  Lockhart
  Pellico
  Pepys
  Plato
  Pliny
  Plutarch
  Renan
  Southey
  Stephen
  Villari


ESSAY

Originally intended, as its name implies, to be a tentative effort
rather than a finished production, the essay has none the less become
one of the most perfect forms of prose. Its subject and the treatment
thereof may be of almost any nature, provided it is well wrought
and finished in style; for an essay is the artistic consideration
of a topic, often critical, as in the case of Matthew Arnold's
masterpieces, humorous, as with Lamb, philosophical as with Emerson,
Carlyle, and Ruskin, and so on through a dozen diverse manners. In
general the essay is brief, critical, and scholarly, and bears the
stamp of the author's personality and individual opinion in his most
polished style.

Bacon and Montaigne were the first to use it, Milton followed, and
then Addison and Steele brought it to a high state of light and
pungent perfection. Lamb, Macaulay, and Stevenson are perhaps the
leaders in its later development. The work of such writers as Walton
and Gilbert White, though not perhaps within the stricter limits of
the definition, is closely related to the essay in tone and style.

  Addison
  Arnold, M.
  Benson
  De Quincey
  Hamerton
  Harrison
  Hazlitt
  Howells
  Lamb
  Lang
  La Ramée
  Lowell
  Macaulay
  Mill
  Mitchell
  Montaigne
  Morley
  Pater
  Ruskin
  Sainte-Beuve
  Sidney
  Steele
  Stephen
  Stevenson
  Thackeray
  Thoreau
  Walton
  Warner
  White, G.


HUMOR

Humor is the most subtle of intellectual modes of expression. To
define it and lay down its laws and principles is all but beyond
human power. For it ranges from the inspired nonsense of Carroll's
"Alice in Wonderland" and "Through the Looking-Glass" or the rough
and ready gusto of Browne's "Showman's Courtship" to the airily
intangible delicacy of Lamb's "Essays of Elia" and the venomous
sarcasm of Swift's "Gulliver's Travels." Mere wit turns on an absurd
similarity in words or ideas, as in Hood's lines:

      "They went and told the sexton, and
         The sexton tolled the bell."

Yet the deepest humor is all but pathos; Don Quixote's demented
visions of giants that prove to be windmills and of castles that turn
out to be taverns provoke our laughter while they stir our pity.

Humor would seem to depend, according to some, upon the association
of ideas or circumstances that have no true relation to each other,
as if they actually possessed a natural relationship. For this reason
a cat or a cow dressed in coat and trousers provokes laughter, or
a village bully described as a proud monarch causes a smile. An
unexpected answer made as seriously as if it were appropriate is one
of the commoner examples of the ludicrous. It is much for the same
reason that actual misfortune may appear laughable, if the element of
suffering is suppressed, as in Joel Chandler Harris's "Uncle Remus"
stories, or Gilbert's "Yarn of the Nancy Bell." Its very subtlety
limits the appeal of humor. "One man's meat is another man's poison"
applies more closely to this division of authorship than to any
other. What tickles the fancy of one person, and more especially, one
nation, may not afford even passing amusement to another. Englishmen
find our comic papers dull, while many Americans see little to laugh
at in "Punch."

  Barham
  Browne
  Carroll
  Cervantes
  Cowper
  Gilbert
  Harris
  Harte
  Holmes
  Hood
  Hope
  Irving
  Jerrold
  Jonson
  Lamb
  Lowell
  Richter
  Sheridan
  Sterne
  Swift


FOR THE CHILDREN

The foundations of good taste are best laid in childhood. Fairy
tales, adventures, and all sorts of stories for children may be
well designed and well written, or the opposite, just as much as
books for older people. Choose your children's books as you choose
their food; take care they get no trash, arrange a tempting diet of
wholesome nourishment for their minds. The authors listed below wrote
as carefully and thoughtfully for little folks as when they wrote
for grown-ups. Andersen devoted his life to authorship for children;
the Grimm brothers made a scientific study of folk-lore and fairy
tales throughout the German empire, collecting the stories told by
the firesides in each district. Carroll, Hawthorne, Kingsley, and
many others put their best efforts into books which are unquestioned
examples of great literature and yet were purposed entirely for
youth. There is no occasion for young people to ruin their taste and
their appreciation with ill-written rubbish.

  Æsop
  Andersen
  Arabian Nights
  Brown
  Fouqué
  Grimm
  Hughes
  Irving
  Jewish Lit.
  Kingsley
  Laboulaye
  Perrault
  Raspe
  Russian Lit.
  Swift


TRAVEL

The majority of travelers have been men of action rather than words,
filled with enthusiasm and inspiration for deeds instead of books.
Columbus, Magellan, Drake, and the rest of the leaders of exploration
have left nothing that can be called literature. Their records,
at best, are scientific reports of their discoveries. Still, ever
since the days when Pausanias made his remarkable tour of Greece and
described its wonders and Herodotus jotted down the travelers' tales
of Egypt, there have been able writers to tell of the marvels, real
or imaginary, to be found in foreign lands.

  Audubon
  Dana
  Hearn
  Heine
  Kinglake
  Mandeville
  Melville
  Pausanias
  Polo
  Stevenson
  Tyndall


DRAMA

In both ancient and modern literature the drama is of religious
origin. Among the Greeks it began as a service in memory of some dead
hero, the choir or chorus chanting the story of his life and deeds.
Their leader presently began to take an actor's part, addressing the
audience or congregation, and then other persons were introduced
who carried on a dialogue with him and at last played the part of
characters in the hero's history. In the Middle Ages, when the great
majority of the people could not read, the Bible story was acted
at Christmas, Easter, and other festivals in order to impress it
on their minds more vividly. From this it was an easy step to the
presentation of historical events, and it was but one more step to
the modern drama's elaborate staging and well-rounded plot. (For the
poetic drama, see p. 40.)

In general the drama has certain limitations which must be taken
into account before passing judgment upon a play. Three hours is the
utmost duration for a play; it must 'get across' within that period,
since an audience becomes wearied during the third hour. It appeals
to two senses, hearing and sight, while other forms of literature
appeal but to one. This is an advantage as far as it enables the
dramatist to tell his story by scenery and action as well as by
speech and incidental music. It is a handicap when the action or
the scenery is faulty and distracts the attention of the audience
from the dialogue. Descriptions of any length, the study or analysis
of personality, all features of ordinary fiction which delay the
action are impossible on the stage. Speech and action must be fitted
together so as to carry the plot through without pause, revealing the
story forcibly, clearly, and yet naturally, within the restricted
time.

These limitations have been handled in widely varying manners:
three systems of presentation have been employed, the ancient,
the medieval, and the modern, all of which are to be seen at the
present day, thanks to the revival of Greek plays in the stadiums
and amphitheaters of our colleges and likewise to the revival of the
Elizabethan drama during the past ten years.

The ancient or Greek drama was presented in a stone amphitheater
against a background of marble, constructed in the form of a palace
or temple; the semicircular space occupied by the orchestra seats
in our theaters contained an altar in the center and was used by
the actors as a part of the stage; the chorus in particular used
this space for their stately dances and stood at one side during
the progress of the action, commenting on the course of events in
odes which they chanted. The lack of movable scenery, and other
limitations, resulted in the restrictions known as =the three
'unities,'= of action, time, and place. No play, according to =the
unity of action=, should introduce incidents that were not a part of
the main action; the plot must be absolutely simple. Thus the story
of Jessica and Lorenzo, in "The Merchant of Venice" would be barred
by this convention, as it does not contribute to the development of
the main story of Antonio and Shylock. The =unity of time= required
that the action should not represent the occurrences of more than a
day at the very outside, and the =unity of place= held the action to
one spot. These latter conventions were to increase the impression
of truth and actuality on the minds of the spectators, heightening
the effect of complete naturalness and leaving their imaginations
free to grasp the problems of the plot without the additional effort
of supposing lapses of time and changes of scene to have occurred.
The number of actors was small; usually two, or at most three, were
permitted to take part at one time in a portion of the dialogue.
These conventions produce a simplicity that was not bare and dull,
but just the reverse; the attention is focused directly upon the
leading character and his fate from beginning to end. The effect is
single and direct, there is no complexity or intricacy to puzzle the
audience or distract its interest in the crisis which is so obviously
approaching. The grandeur of this type of drama is like that of a
great hymn, such as "Old Hundred," sung by a vast congregation.

The medieval plays, which reached their height in Shakespeare's
time, were very different from those of the ancients. The stage was
almost as bare and scenery was not used, but changes of locality were
frequent, indicated by hanging out a sign with the words, "This is
a garden" or "A Street in Venice" and so on. In the same way there
was no restriction upon time; years might be supposed to have passed
between one act and the next. The imagination of the audience was
expected to take care of such matters, and indeed it did so with
the utmost ease. The plot could be supplemented with all sorts of
incidents whether they directly concerned it or not. For example, the
wrestling scene at the beginning of "As You Like It" was inserted to
satisfy the Elizabethan love of sport, not because it could be of
use in advancing the progress of the story, as it did nothing of the
kind. The Greek unities were disregarded completely; however, the
most impressive of Shakespeare's tragedies do adhere to the principle
of the unity of action,--"Macbeth," for example, deals with the
consequences of unscrupulous ambition, each event in the play leads
directly on to the catastrophe without a pause, there are no minor
events or plots.

The modern play differs from both the earlier forms of the drama
in its appeal to the eye. The use of scenery, which came in at
the beginning of the Age of Classicism, has led to an elaboration
of stage effects which sometimes is injurious to the success of
a production. Much of the modern stage-craft is concerned with
scenic effects and therefore does not come into this discussion.
The chief distinction to-day lies in the treatment of problems
of everyday life in an everyday manner. Neither the ancient nor
the Shakespearian playwrights handled tragedy in the setting of
ordinary life. The Greeks portrayed famous heroes and princes and
so did the Elizabethans, but rarely, except in comedy, was there
any presentation of the life of the middle classes of that time.
Sheridan and Ibsen, in common with most of the modern playwrights,
take the life of the mass of the people and draw their illustrations
of success and failure direct. The audience of to-day sees itself
walking and talking on the stage, playing the fool or the hero.

Each style has its merits and its faults, each is powerful in the
hands of a genius and each fails when used by incompetents. The
average drama depends largely upon the actors for its success, it can
hardly be classed among literary efforts. Only the plays wrought by
masters of thought as well as of speech can be given a place in the
realm of literature.

  Æschylus
  Calderon
  Euripides
  Goethe
  Ibsen
  Jonson
  Lessing
  Marlowe
  Molière
  Racine
  Rostand
  Schiller
  Shakespeare
  Sheridan
  Sophocles


ORATORY

The art of addressing a large gathering and winning their support, as
well as their attention, by sound argument and also by eloquence is
a study that is in danger of falling into a decline, owing perhaps
to the prevalence of newspapers and the rapidity with which an
argument or an idea can be spread broadcast over the world by the
telegraph and the press. In reading even the finest speeches of the
past or the present allowance must almost always be made for the
personal magnetism of the speaker, the appeal made by his presence,
his gestures, and his voice. For this reason it is difficult to form
a just estimate of the worth of a speech, especially at a date when
the subject has become less vital or even unfamiliar through the
passage of time. The sole bases of criticism under these conditions
must be the force of the argument and the eloquence of the style.
This is aptly illustrated in the case of Burke, whose arguments were
admitted to be irresistible in their strength, but who had so poor a
delivery that he was called the dinner-bell of the House of Commons,
in reference to the departure of the members when he rose to speak.
The most influential speakers have been those who combined skill in
argument with grace and eloquence and reinforced these qualities with
a commanding personality. These talents are needed to-day if we are
to maintain the standard set by Washington, Webster, and Lincoln.

  Bright
  Brooks
  Burke
  Channing
  Choate
  Demosthenes
  Henry
  Lincoln
  Mirabeau
  Phillips
  Robertson
  Sumner
  Washington
  Webster


PHILOSOPHY AND SCIENCE

The aim of philosophy, like that of science, is to probe the mystery
of life, to discover as far as possible the nature of man and of the
universe in which he dwells. These efforts began when men first asked
"What am I? What is this world?" Philosophy attempts the answer by
reasoning and meditation, while science uses inventions, such as the
telescope, mathematical calculation, and all other means of obtaining
accurate information regarding the physical environment and nature
of man. The former is concerned with the spirit, the unseen, the
motives of honor, love, and the like, and the infinite possibilities
of the mind and the soul; the latter deals with the actual, material
conditions of life. The best of scientific literature so closely
borders on philosophy that it has been included among the selections
that treat of philosophic problems.

  Aurelius
  Bacon
  Carlyle
  Cicero
  Darwin
  Emerson
  Epictetus
  Galton
  Hamilton
  Kant
  Lucretius
  Machiavelli
  Mill
  More
  Pascal
  Plato
  Rousseau
  Ruskin
  Schopenhauer
  Seneca
  Shaler
  Smith, A.
  Spencer


RELIGION

Certain hymns will always linger in the memory from the days of
childhood; and certain sermons and devotional works have so feelingly
expressed the aspirations of Christian life that they have attained
enduring fame. These are here collected without reference to
denominational distinction.

Also, as it is of interest to note the ideals of thinkers in other
than Christian lands, passages are included from the teachings of
Confucius, the Chinese scholar; Cleanthes, the Greek poet; the life
of Buddha, in Hindoo Literature; the Talmud, in Jewish Literature;
and the "Koran" of Mohammed.


HYMNS

  Bernard, St.
  Bernard of Cluny
  Bonar
  Bowring
  Cowper
  Faber
  Heber
  Herbert
  Jacopone
  Keble
  Luther
  Lyte
  Milman
  Newman
  Palmer
  Thomas of Celano
  Toplady
  Watts
  Wesley


SERMONS AND DEVOTIONAL WORKS

  Bowne
  Brierley
  Brooks
  Browne, Sir T.
  Bunyan
  Channing
  Hooker
  à Kempis
  Luther
  Mazzini
  Robertson
  Wyclif




FROM SEVEN TO TWENTY-ONE

Lists of readings for young and old.

Showing how to acquire, by easy stages, a knowledge of the best in
literature, year by year.


Unlike poets, painters, and the rest of the world of artists,
booklovers are made, not born. But many a booklover has been spoiled
in the making, too; so that we must needs give thought to the process
of transforming everyday folk into _willing and skilful readers and
lovers of books_. Many boys and girls and many men and women have
lost all interest in the realm of books through lack of suitable
material for enjoyment and adequate opportunity for practice. What
books they could find round the house failed to meet their desires or
hold their attention; probably they were technical or 'dry-as-dust.'

In other words the untrained reader, whether young or old, must be
trained and exercised on the right books at the right time. Not
that he should be coaxed and tempted with light fiction or showy
trash, quite the contrary; he must acquire _strength of mind and
intellectual habits_--he is to be trained to grasp serious thought as
well as highstrung romance. Conan Doyle's thrilling "White Company"
or Blackmore's tender "Lorna Doone" form excellent entertainment, but
they must be supplemented by sturdy common sense, such as one finds
in Franklin's "Autobiography," Dana's "Two Years Before the Mast,"
or Bancroft's account of the Lexington and Concord fight. The young
mind, and the old one as well, cannot grow strong and able without
exercise. Just as tennis, football, swimming, or golf help to develop
and strengthen our physical powers, so the mind likewise must take
exercise that will ripen and enlarge the intellectual powers. The
joy of living is dependent upon full vigor of brain and brawn; the
weakling, whether in intellect or in muscle, loses the best that life
has to give. Our ideal must be not merely a sound mind in a sound
body but, rather, a strong mind in a strong body.

The lists that follow have been devised to meet the requirements for
training the mind to a ready facility and enjoyment of books and
reading. Naturally, these groups are arbitrary, they definitely place
one author or selection in the eleven year old's list, another in
the fifteen; whereas either might well be transferred, in individual
cases. The object manifestly is to group writers and selections as a
means of guidance and help to the average reader whether parent or
child, but not to draw hard and fast lines. The sooner the reader
becomes ready to wander as he will, the sooner will he be a true
booklover.

=Seven to Ten Years of Age.= At this time of life, as every one
knows, fairy tales are an unfailing delight and form the foundations,
moreover, of all thorough literary appreciation. In addition to
these, tales of adventure or of travel, such as Malory's Morte
Darthur, or Marco Polo's astonishing discoveries in China, serve as
admirable supplementary reading at this age.

  ÆSOP
    Fables

  ANDERSEN
    Fairy Tales

  GRIMM
    Fairy Tales

  HARRIS
    Uncle Remus

  IRVING
    Rip Van Winkle

  KEY
    Star Spangled Banner

  KINGSLEY
    Water Babies

  LABOULAYE
    Poucinet

  MALORY
    Morte Darthur

  PERRAULT
    Fairy Tales

  POLO
    Travels

  RUSSIAN LIT.
    The Water King

  SMITH, S. F.
    America

  SWIFT
    Gulliver's Travels

=Eleven and Twelve Years of Age.= The next step consists in awakening
the sense of understanding, rousing the mind to grasp actual scenes
and situations. For this purpose the "Pilgrim's Progress," "Two
Years Before the Mast," "The Village Blacksmith," or "Horatius" are
especially suitable. For while the fairy tale element is continued
in "Cupid and Psyche," the "Odyssey," and "Undine," it is to these
more realistic selections that we must look for the stimulus to
imaginative growth that the children need. For this reason,
"Robinson Crusoe" is of paramount value at this time simply because
it trains the young mind to picture the scenes or events with the
utmost care for details; probably no other work of fiction in English
Literature can equal it for realistic vividness and precision.

  APULEIUS
    Cupid and Psyche

  BROWN, J.
    Rab

  BUNYAN
    Pilgrim's Progress

  CARROLL
    Alice in Wonderland, etc.

  COOPER
    Pathfinder

  DANA
    Two Years Before the Mast

  DEFOE
    Robinson Crusoe

  FOUQUÉ
    Undine

  GESTA ROMANORUM

  HAWTHORNE
    Snow Image

  HEMANS
    Casabianca
    Pilgrim Fathers

  HERODOTUS
    Legends

  HOMER
    Iliad
    Odyssey

  HOWE
    Battle Hymn

  HUGHES
    Tom Brown

  JAPANESE LIT.
    The Ronins

  LIVY
    Legends

  LONGFELLOW
    Village Blacksmith
    Hiawatha
    Evangeline

  MACAULAY
    Horatius

  MELVILLE
    Typee

  MEREDITH
    Shagpat

  RASPE
    Baron Münchausen

  READ
    Sheridan's Ride

  WHITTIER
    Barbara Frietchie

=Thirteen and Fourteen Years of Age.= This period should mark
the beginning of true reading power--the faculty of perceiving
and absorbing the pictures, the facts, the ideas that lie within
the printed page. The true joys of reading first-class fiction,
for example, "Don Quixote" or "The Cloister and the Hearth," are
usually first experienced in these years. And in the same manner
young readers delight in the more vivid pages of history, such
as "The Relief of Leyden," or "The Conquest of Peru," or--best
of all--Raleigh's telling account of the fight of the 'Revenge'
together with Tennyson's magnificent poem, built up from the prose
of Raleigh. For it is in such passages as these that the natural
tendency to hero-worship is roused and fostered. Jim Bludso, Sir
Launfal, Alexander the Great, John Halifax, Lorna Doone, and
Constantia, together with the splendid characters in the works
already mentioned, all establish in the minds of the average boy
and girl examples of courage, courtesy, and nobility that are never
forgotten.

  ADDISON
    Mirza
    Arabian Nights

  BLACKMORE
    Lorna Doone

  BOCCACCIO
    Constantia
    Federigo

  BORROW
    Lavengro

  BROWNE, C. F.
    The Showman's Courtship

  CELLINI
    Life

  CERVANTES
    Don Quixote

  COLLINS, W. W.
    A Terribly Strange Bed

  CRAIK
    John Halifax

  DICKENS
    David Copperfield
    Pickwick

  FRENCH LITERATURE
    Aucassin

  HALE
    Man Without a Country

  HARTE
    Truthful James

  HAY
    Jim Bludso

  HENRY
    Speech

  HOLINSHED
    Princes in the Tower

  HOLMES
    Nautilus
    Old Ironsides

  HUNT
    Abou Ben Adhem

  INGELOW
    High Tide

  JEWISH LITERATURE
    Tobit

  KINGLAKE
    Eothen

  LE SAGE
    Gil Blas

  LOWELL
    Sir Launfal

  LYTTON
    Pompeii

  MCMASTER
    Settler Life in 1800

  MOTLEY
    Relief of Leyden

  NORSE LITERATURE
    Discovery of Vinland

  PLUTARCH
    Alexander the Great

  PRESCOTT
    Conquest of Peru

  RALEIGH
    The Fight of the "Revenge"

  READE
    Cloister and the Hearth

  SOUTHEY
    Inchcape Rock

  TENNYSON
    The Revenge
    The Light Brigade, Etc.

=Fifteen and Sixteen Years of Age.= The appreciation of poetry is
one of the most subtle and difficult developments in the youthful
intellect. Yet some enjoyment of poetry, not merely narrative poems,
but contemplative verse as well, should manifest itself during these
next years. Furthermore, it is high time to form an acquaintance with
writers who will be met again and again in days yet to come. No one
will maintain for a moment that a sixteen year old lad will fully
understand and appreciate Milton's "L'Allegro," with its treasury of
allusion; yet, on the other hand, no one will pretend that this same
lad should not at least be granted the opportunity to listen for the
first time to those immortal lines. For this reason not only Milton,
but Lincoln, Cowper, Pepys, Tolstoi, Hodgkin, Gray, and several
others are included in the list.

But apart from the more serious and contemplative side of the
reading that can be commenced at this age, there is much that will
fascinate and delight those who are looking for pastime rather than
deep thinking. Barham's "Ingoldsby Legends," of which "The Knight
and the Lady" is a most characteristic tale in verse, have long been
the joy of all who love laughter and nonsense; and so with Irving's
"Knickerbocker's New York," which in many respects is unequaled for
wit and delicate fun. Crawford's "The Upper Berth," Doyle's "White
Company," and Dumas's "Three Musketeers" furnish thrill enough for
the most eager adventure seeker. Tolstoi and Goldsmith will satisfy
a quieter mood with their gentle satire on the folly and stupidity
and vanity of everyday people, who none the less are the salt of the
earth, after all.

  AGASSIZ
    Mountains

  AUDUBON
    In the Woods

  BANCROFT
    Lexington and Concord

  BARHAM
    The Knight and the Lady

  BARRIE
    Lads and Lasses

  BERNARD, ST.
    Hymn

  NOTE. The reader should take care to read and even to reread
  the majority of the selections in the previous lists before
  attempting further progress.

  BERNARD OF CLUNY
    Hymns

  BRONTË
    Jane Eyre

  COLERIDGE
    Poems

  COWPER
    Poems

  CRAWFORD, F. M.
    The Upper Berth

  DOYLE
    The White Company

  DUMAS
    Three Musketeers,
    Monte Cristo, etc.

  EWALD
    King Christian

  FRANKLIN
    Autobiography

  FROUDE
    A Cagliostro of the Second Century

  GILBERT
    The Nancy Bell

  GOLDSMITH
    Vicar of Wakefield

  GRAY
    Elegy

  HAWTHORNE
    The Old Manse

  HEINE
    Travel Pictures

  HODGKIN
    Attila the Hun

  HOOD
    Poems

  IRVING
    Knickerbocker's New York

  JOSEPHUS
    Destruction of the Temple

  KINGSLEY
    Poems

  LA FONTAINE
    Fables

  LINCOLN
    Gettysburg Speech

  LONGFELLOW
    Poems

  MAHAFFY
    Alexander the Great

  MILTON
    L'Allegro
    Il Penseroso

  PEPYS
    Diary

  PHILLIPS
    Toussaint L'Ouverture

  ROUGET DE LISLE
    The Marseillaise

  SCOTT
    Selections

  STOWE
    Uncle Tom's Cabin

  TOLSTOI
    Where Love Is

  WHITTIER
    Poems

=Seventeen and Eighteen Years of Age.= With increasing maturity we
may naturally expect the mind to enjoy the more calm and meditative
moods of life: for example, the essays of Addison and Lamb, the more
forceful historical reflections of such writers as Green, Froissart,
and Parkman, the "Utopia" of Sir Thomas More, Thoreau's "Walden," and
Washington's "Farewell Address." These form an excellent introduction
to the deeper thoughts which will shortly be forced upon youth as it
goes out into the world to fight for a career.

At this time, too, interest is stirred to attempt an understanding of
the 'reason for things'--the mind endeavors to arrive at some law or
principle beneath the varied course of life and action in the world.
In other words, boyhood and girlhood are past, and an older view of
life and its responsibilities must naturally take the place of the
carefree spirit of earlier days. The qualities of friendship that
appear in "Tennessee's Partner" and the search for spiritual as well
as intellectual companionship and understanding that is emphasized
in Tennyson or Matthew Arnold are at this time beginning to be more
fully appreciated and understood.

  ADDISON
    Punning
    Good Nature
    Westminster Abbey

  ALDRICH
    Père Antoine

  ANGLO-SAXON LITERATURE
    Beowulf

  ARNOLD, M.
    The Forsaken Merman

  BALZAC
    The Purse

  BJÖRNSON
    Railroad and Churchyard

  BROOKS
    Lincoln

  CAINE
    The Bondman

  CAMPBELL
    Poems

  CREASY
    Decisive Battles

  DAUDET
    Tartarin

  EDGEWORTH
    Castle Rackrent

  FIELD
    Poems

  FROISSART
    Battles of Otterbourne and Crécy

  GASKELL
    Cranford

  GREEN
    English History

  HARDY
    The Three Strangers

  HARTE
    Tennessee's Partner

  HINDOO LITERATURE

  HUGO
    Selections

  JERROLD
    Mrs. Caudle

  LAMB
    Essays

  LEVER
    Charles O'Malley

  LINCOLN
    Second Inaugural

  LOWELL
    The Courtin'

  MORE
    Utopia

  OVID
    Philemon and Baucis

  PARKMAN
    La Salle
    The Plains of Abraham

  POE
    Tales

  SHORTHOUSE
    John Inglesant

  STEELE
    Essays

  SWIFT
    Selections

  TENNYSON
    Poems

  THOREAU
    Walden

  TYNDALL
    Ascent of Mont Blanc

  VOLTAIRE
    Charles XII

  WASHINGTON
    Farewell Address

=Nineteen and Twenty Years of Age.= Unquestionably, as the years
pass on, we read again the books that have already given us so many
hours of happiness and amusement. For this reason it is well for the
young booklover to return to the lists for the previous years and
renew acquaintanceships there. No doubt some of the authors whom he
found but moderately amusing then will now win far more favor in his
sight. Meanwhile, among the fresh material history and criticism
naturally find a prominent place. Mommsen's estimate of Julius Cæsar
and Chesterton's appreciative critique of Dickens stand among the
foremost studies of great men that the world has yet produced. In
the field of poetry it is high time to spend some quiet hours with
Emerson, Browning, Shakespeare, Shelley, and Wordsworth. These five
poets represent perhaps the very best that English verse has produced
in the way of meditation--insight into the depths of nature and
humanity.

At this point the reader will do well to consider other chapters
in this Handbook, notably that on Literary Criticism, and the rest
of Part II, which deals with the general principles underlying a
fuller comprehension of literature. Part III, Studies of Great
Authors, will be of even greater help to those readers who are
finding increased pleasure in reading as students rather than for
the sake of recreation or light reading alone. By following out the
lines of thought presented in Parts II and III, especially if one
does not attempt to carry too heavy a quantity of reading at a time,
the enjoyment of books and thought will be immensely stimulated and
broadened.

  ALDRICH
    Poems

  ALFRED THE GREAT
    Poems

  ASCHAM
    The Schoolmaster

  AUSTEN
    Pride and Prejudice

  BEECHER
    Industry and Idleness

  BERANGER
    Poems

  BOSWELL
    Life of Johnson

  BROWNING, R.
    Poems

  BURKE
    Speech

  BYRON
    Poems

  CHANNING
    Self-culture

  CHESTERTON
    Dickens

  DE QUINCEY
    Dreams
    Our Ladies of Sorrow

  ELIOT
    Brother Jacob
    Poems

  EMERSON
    Poems

  FARRAR
    Corruption of Rome

  FERRERO
    Empire Building

  FIELDING
    Selections

  FREEMAN
    The World Romeless

  GIBBON
    Roman Empire

  HAWKINS
    Dolly Dialogues

  HEARN
    In Japan

  HOLMES
    The Autocrat

  HOWELLS
    Essay

  HUNT
    Autobiography

  JOHNSON
    Rasselas

  KEATS
    Poems

  KIPLING
    Mandalay
    Man Who Would be King

  LOCKHART
    Life of Scott

  MACAULAY
    Milton

  MILTON
    Poems

  MIRABEAU
    Franklin

  MOMMSEN
    Julius Cæsar

  MORRIS, W.
    Poem

  PAUSANIAS
    Description of Greece

  PLATO
    Trial of Socrates

  PLINY
    Letters

  POE
    Poems

  POPE
    Poems

  RILEY
    Poems

  ROSTAND
    Cyrano

  SCHILLER
    Wilhelm Tell

  SHAKESPEARE
    Selections

  SHELLEY
    Poems

  SHERIDAN
    The Rivals
    The School for Scandal

  STEPHEN
    Hawthorne

  STEVENSON
    Selections

  SUETONIUS
    Roman Emperors

  SUMNER
    Grandeur of Nations

  TACITUS
    The Histories

  THACKERAY
    Selections

  WHITMAN
    O Captain

  WORDSWORTH
    Poems


=Twenty-one and After.= During these years, through respect for
wisdom and experience, maturity rapidly quickens into being. Once
we get a few hard knocks in the battle of life, our regard for the
learning and understanding of our elders soon increases. We likewise
can enter more thoroughly into the work of such thinkers as Carlyle,
Galton, Emerson, Ruskin, Shaler, or of such poets as Chaucer and
Goethe. For these men have spent the best of their lives in studying
and probing into the causes and developments of our moods and
characters. Carlyle has given us the most terrific and stirring
account ever written of the battle that is waged in every man's soul
between the forces of good and evil. Goethe has dramatized this same
problem, revealing the wretchedness of him who only thinks of self,
who drags his nearest and dearest down to ruin simply to gratify his
lusts or his whims. Ruskin searches architecture, painting, or even
the workmanship of everyday trades in order to discover their true
merit--their greatness and their weakness. From such writings we can
learn more and yet more each time we peruse them. There is no end to
the richness and wealth of thought and experience to be gained from
these alone.

  ALCOTT
    Thoreau's Flute

  ARNOLD, E.
    Poems

  BACON
    Essays

  BARNARD
    Robin Gray

  BENSON
    Games

  BLAKE
    Poems

  BOURDILLON
    Light

  BRYANT
    Poems

  BURNS
    Poems

  CARLYLE
    Selections

  CHAUCER
    Poems

  CHOATE
    Webster

  DANTE
    Divine Comedy

  EMERSON
    Essays

  EVELYN
    Diary

  FIELDS
    Dickens

  FRANKLIN
    Poor Richard's Almanac

  GOETHE
    Faust, etc.

  GOLDSMITH
    Deserted Village

  HAMERTON
    Intellectual Life

  HARRISON
    Choice of Books

  HAZLITT
    Great and Little Things

  HEINE
    The Romantic School

  HENLEY
    Out of the Night

  IBSEN
    A Doll's House

  JACOPONE
    Stabat Mater

  JEWISH LITERATURE
    The Talmud

  JOUBERT
    Essays

  LANG
    The Divining Rod

  LANIER
    Marshes of Glynn

  LOWELL
    Chaucer

  LUTHER
    Table Talk
    Ein Feste Burg

  MCCARTHY
    Disasters of Cabul

  MARLOWE
    Dr. Faustus

  MAUPASSANT
    The Piece of String

  MILTON
    Areopagitica

  MITCHELL
    Dream Life

  MOLIÈRE
    Imaginary Invalid

  ROSSETTI, D. G.
    Poems

  RUSKIN
    Selections

  SAINTE-BEUVE
    Mme. de Staël

  SHALER
    The Last of Earth and Man

  SIENKIEWICZ
    Quo Vadis

  STERNE
    Selections

  THOMAS OF CELANO
    Dies Iræ

  WALTON
    Compleat Angler

Apart from the power to appreciate the thought itself, the reader
by this time is surely ready to take pleasure in the style of such
writers as Elizabeth Barrett Browning, Matthew Arnold, Walter Pater,
Herrick, and Spenser. And with respect to the matter, he surely will
profit in the company of Sir Thomas Browne, Thomas à Kempis, Mill,
and Plato, presenting four remarkably valuable points of view in
their studies of what is most worth man's consideration. Further
reading of interest in style and in matter will be found under the
headings of "Essay," "Travel," "Drama," "Oratory," "Philosophy,"
etc., on pages 46-53 of this Handbook.

One of the chief problems of the reader deals with the question of
foreign authors. Perhaps one man in a hundred thousand can find
time to learn to read more than four languages fluently. If he is
to get in touch with the great writers of other tongues than those
which he knows, he must perforce read translations. And for most of
us translations are the only resource. The modern writers have been
translated with but slight difficulty, mainly because their views of
life are so closely akin to ours that their thoughts may be put into
English with slight trouble. But the ancients, the masters of Greek
and Roman Literature, regarded life from other standpoints than ours.
They were mainly interested in interpreting fate and the mysteries
of life. Their work, then, is for the most part philosophic, even
when presented in the form of drama or of poetry. It is so great, so
lofty in tone and so profound in its perception of everlasting truths
that we cannot afford to neglect it. But it can only be grasped by
a mature mind and by calm and patient meditation. The tragedies of
Æschylus, Euripides, and Sophocles, the poetry of Lucretius and
Cleanthes, and the meditations of Marcus Aurelius rank among the
grandest and most sublime works that mortal mind has ever achieved.
For complete lists of foreign authors, see the classified entries on
pages 28-35 of this Handbook.




THE INDEX AND THE BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES


=The Use of the Index.= The thoughtful and habitual use of the Index
will prove of more lasting benefit than any other practice associated
with reading. Not only is attention called to authors, to the titles
of selections, and to the opening lines of familiar and unfamiliar
poems, but hundreds upon hundreds of topics are there listed, dealing
with subjects of endless variety as viewed by the ablest minds of
the past and the present. Agriculture, for example, is dealt with by
ancients and moderns--among others, by Cicero and by Charles Dudley
Warner. America's development, we find, has been presented from such
diverse viewpoints as those of Ferrero, the modern Italian historian;
of Goethe, the master-poet of old Germany, as bitter a foe of Prussia
as any who live to-day; of Hamilton, the statesman-economist; of
McMaster, the historian; of Henry, the patriot orator; of Leslie
Stephen, the English critic, and other leaders of the world's
thought. The value of books, the use of chariots of war, the case
for and against Charles I of England, the nature of conversation,
the progress of the drama in ancient and in more recent times--these
topics suggest the amazing diversity of outlook.

Whether for the sake of study or merely as a pastime, every moment
employed upon the Index will prove stimulating, will open trains of
thought and furnish additional means of enjoyment that otherwise will
lie undiscovered.

These fifty pages provide an encyclopedia of intellectual
entertainment and cultivation. Through them the reader can pursue
a subject or a line of thought as nowhere else. Not the opinion of
one man, or of one nation, or of one era alone, but the best and
most valued reflections of the great men of all the ages are here
collected under every important heading on which they best expressed
themselves.

Throughout this whole work, Opportunity lies in wait, needing only
to be recognized; then, she at once enriches your life and your
usefulness. Not a page but contains thoughts, suggestions, grave
and gay, old and new, matter-of-fact or sublime,--yet all of them
leading to a more sincere and purposeful understanding of the deeds
and thoughts that make up a sound and full career. But of all these
thousands of pages and selections not any contain more hints for the
reader than the pages of the Index.


=The Use of the Biographical Sketches.= The reader who has once
grasped the inestimable value of reflecting on the books that
he meets, will naturally perceive the worth of the Biographical
Sketches that immediately precede the selections in the LIBRARY. For
although these are purposely terse, yet they have been painstakingly
constructed to supply two essential needs; first, an introduction to
the author, as well as to his best work; second, a guide to his other
works.

As has elsewhere been pointed out (pages 19, 28, 55, etc., of this
Handbook), the true appreciation and enjoyment of a writer are
unquestionably increased by understanding his personality and his
outlook on the world.

In the second place, the selections present the best and only the
best achievements of each writer. They obviously cannot include
thirty volumes of Scott's novels, for example; nor is it desirable
that the quotations from any author should extend beyond complete
passages of assured distinction. On the other hand, persons attracted
by an author's style or subject matter will naturally desire to
read more of his work and even to acquire several of his most
characteristic books. The Biographical Sketch lists his principal
writings so that you can send for them to bookseller or public
library.

THE LIBRARY OF ENTERTAINMENT will thus form the nucleus of a
collection that can become unique, in that it will not contain an
author that you have not tested before purchase. To own books that
you value and esteem unfailingly leads to reading with increased
pleasure day by day; such reading forms the purpose that lies behind
these volumes.




LITERARY CRITICISM


Criticism is a term that is commonly misused and misunderstood.
It does not mean condemnation and disapproval. It does mean sound
judgment, a careful valuation of the work under discussion, weighing
its merits and its faults; therefore it follows that sincere
criticism may be wholly free from fault-finding, provided the subject
proves to be without blemish. The criticism of Milton's minor poems,
"L'Allegro," "Il Penseroso," and "Lycidas," must be an appreciation
of their beauty and power, since they are practically faultless.

To form a trustworthy opinion regarding a piece of literature is
not difficult; all that is necessary is to make a definite, orderly
inquiry into certain essential facts.

I. The first of these concern the author himself, his surroundings,
and the influences which shaped his thoughts.

1. =The period when he lived.= Each of the great ages of literature
has its special characteristics and tendencies, without a knowledge
of which it is impossible to judge a writer's work. (These periods
are defined on p. 19 ff.) For example, if Dickens had lived in
Shakespeare's time his writings would have been very different in
form and in style; he would have probably written comedies for the
stage instead of novels.

2. =His nation.= Nationality also has strong traits that must be
taken into account. (These are stated on p. 28 ff.) If Dickens had
been a Frenchman, he would have paid more attention to the grace and
clearness of his style; if he had been a German, he would have tended
to be more philosophical in his thought, his plots would have been
deeper, and his characters less vivid.

3. =His life and immediate surroundings.= Equally significant are
the social conditions in which a man is reared, whether noble,
like Byron, or poor, like Burns; well-educated, like Macaulay, or
self-taught, like Bunyan; unfortunate and dissipated, like Poe, or
fortunate and happy, like Holmes. These facts all have a direct
bearing on the view we must take of the man's productions. Joel
Chandler Harris could never have written his amusing "Uncle Remus"
stories, if he had not spent his boyhood on a Southern plantation.
De Quincey would never have written "Our Ladies of Sorrow" if he had
not been the slave of opium. Stevenson's "Travels With a Donkey," one
of his most charming books, is due to the fact that his consumptive
tendencies compelled him to go on a walking trip in the pure and
bracing air of the mountains of southern France.

II. A second group of facts deals with the work itself.

1. =The form=; poetry, fiction, history, essay, drama, etc. (These
are discussed on p. 36 ff.)

2. =The style.= The worth of the author's work as a piece of
composition is best decided by observing the following elements,
which taken all together make up the style and quality of his writing.

What =words= does he use? Are they commonplace or do they express his
exact meaning? Are they simple, or unusual and even unintelligible?
Are they forceful or weak? etc.

How are his =sentences= constructed? Are they straightforward or
confused? Do they express a simple, direct thought or do they contain
several ideas? If complex and lengthy, are they still powerful? etc.

Are his =paragraphs= unified; that is, do they contain one leading
idea? Do they follow in systematic order, leading from one to the
other? Is the development of the author's subject easily followed?
etc.

Are the =scenes= and =characters=, the =plots= and =purposes= clearly
shown? Does it require more than one reading to find out what the
writer is trying to say? Is his work convincing? Do the characters
change, and if so, is the change natural or does it seem unreal and
artificial? Are the incidents natural or do some of the events seem
forced? If the latter, do you think the author is justified? What
is the author's aim? Has he any further purpose than that which is
immediately evident? etc.

What is the =tone= of his work? Realism? Imagination? Mystery? Charm?
Beauty? Accuracy? Delicacy? Pathos? Humor? Joy? Sarcasm? etc.

3. =The effect.= What are =your feelings= regarding the work? Do you
like it or dislike it? Why?

What is your cold =judgment= regarding it? Note that this is by no
means necessarily the same thing as what you may feel. Many people
do not care especially for Dickens or Kipling, yet they all grant
that both these authors have deserved their fame. They may not like
them, but their reason and their judgment compel admission of their
ability. It is accordingly important to ask what impression a book
makes on your feelings and on your judgment as well, and to ask why
that impression has grown upon you.

The value of this systematic consideration of a passage of literature
is manifest. The reader's knowledge is increased, and, better still,
his ability to arrive at a wise judgment of other literature is
greater than before. Efficiency in habits of thought is encouraged,
his outlook on life is broader, he becomes more fit to take a
prominent part in social and in business life, wherever judgment and
thought are needed.




PART III




STUDIES OF GREAT AUTHORS


In making use of these Studies, the reader is advised to adopt the
following method:

Read the sketches of the author in the Study and in front of the
selections and then read the selections themselves. Next answer the
questions in the Study, taking care to give reasons for each answer,
with illustrations carefully chosen from the author's work, wherever
possible. In making comparisons between authors or selections
remember that points of contrast as well as of likeness should be
considered.

Be sure to keep in mind the essentials of PART II, and refer not only
to them but to the INDEX for references to national characteristics,
history, and authors.

Further reading should be selected from the author's works given in
the notes which precede the selections and from the biographical and
critical works mentioned at the end of each Study.


ROBERT BURNS

(1759-1796)

Robert Burns was born and spent most of his life in Ayrshire, in
the lowlands of Scotland. Broad-minded, tolerant, and trusting, he
had a place in his heart for all men, whatever their failings. His
thoughtless love of good-fellowship was the principal cause of his
untimely end.

His best songs, dealing with the common life of the Lowlands and
written in the Scottish dialect, were as a rule spontaneous; though
"The Cotter's Saturday Night," probably reminiscent of his boyhood
home, is a more finished and careful production.

He is the greatest of Scotch poets. Since Shakespeare there has been
no better interpreter of the human heart.


THE MAN

  1. Why is Burns called the Ayrshire Bard? Locate Ayrshire on the
  map.

  2. From what rank of society did Burns come?

  3. What was his attitude toward the humbler classes of society?
  II, 379. Toward men in general?

  4. What can you say as to his patriotism?

  5. Was he a favorite with the public?

  6. See Carlyle's opinion of his reception by the public, III, 55;
  of his worth, III, 102.

  7. To what may we ascribe his rapid decline and early death?

  8. What do you judge his views would be as to the merits of
  Romanticism and Classicism?


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. What portion of Great Britain is the scene of most of Burns'
  poems?

  2. Were they the product of deliberate art or spontaneous impulse?

  3. Have his poems any great influence at the present time?

  4. Is his best work in English or in the Scotch dialect? Explain
  why?

  5. Do you consider it worth while to master the difficulties of
  the dialect?

  6. What is your opinion as to the love element in his poetry?

  7. There have been but few better interpreters of nature.

  8. Like many a Scotchman of his day he seems to have had a full
  appreciation of the joys of conviviality.

  9. Had Burns the element of humor in any marked degree?

  10. Compare his songs with those of Shakespeare, Jonson, Byron,
  Shelley, and Tennyson; for feeling, polish, and power.


"THE COTTER'S SATURDAY NIGHT"

  1. Is the scene laid in the Highlands or the Lowlands?

  2. Does the fact that the poem is written in the Scotch dialect
  add to or detract from its beauty? The mingling of literary
  language and dialect is intentional; discuss the value of this.

  3. Would you judge Burns to have been at heart a religious man?

  4. What comparison does the author draw between Scotch and
  Italian songs?

  5. What contrast is drawn between the worship of the poor and
  that of the rich?

  6. To what does Burns ascribe the grandeur of Scotland?

  7. Compare with the "Deserted Village" and the "Elegy in a
  Country Churchyard," in purpose and in style. Which of the three
  breathes the greatest moral earnestness?

  8. "The Cotter's Saturday Night" is a typical poem of the latter
  half of the eighteenth century. What other poems of the period
  resemble it in their treatment of rural life? VI, 94, 106.

  9. Does the poem belong to the Age of Classicism or Romanticism
  or both; in what respects?

  10. For other pictures of Scotch life and character see the
  selections from Barrie, Scott, and Watson.


FOR REFERENCE

  "Life of Robert Burns."--CUNNINGHAM.

  "Modern Idols; Studies in Biography and Criticism."--THORNE.

  "Critical and Miscellaneous Essays."--CARLYLE.

  "The Burns Country."--DOUGALL.

  "The Ayrshire Homes and Haunts of Burns."--SHELLEY.


SIR WALTER SCOTT

(1771-1832)

Scott first achieved success as a poet; but as his fame began to pale
before the rising star of Byron, he wisely dropped verse and appeared
as a writer of fiction, in which he was far more successful. Some
critics consider "Ivanhoe" the greatest romance ever written. Many
of his early novels are of almost equal merit. With "Woodstock" and
"Anne of Geierstein," a decline in his powers is perceptible.

Scott may be considered the founder of the historical novel, and it
is doubtful if he has ever been excelled. His scenes of medieval life
are somewhat overdrawn, it is true, though possibly no more so than
the requirements of successful fiction demanded.

Several of his ancestors had taken a prominent part in the warfare of
the Border, a fact which largely accounts for his great interest in
Scottish legend.

He earned more by his writings than any other literary man of
the period. At his country seat, Abbotsford, he entertained with
lavish hospitality. It became a resort of scholars; and Washington
Irving and many other Americans visited him there. He lived and
died practically without an enemy, even Byron, who assailed him so
bitterly at one time, being won over by his magnanimity. He refused
the post of poet laureate in favor of his friend Southey.

His publishing house failing in 1828 with a shortage of over half a
million, Scott chivalrously devoted the last six years of his life to
the payment of the debt, a feat which he had almost accomplished when
death overtook him.

Although among the first and best of the prose writers of the
Romantic period and a decided follower of the Romantic principles in
his work, yet Scott was so conservative in politics and so patriotic
a supporter of monarchy that the revolutionary spirit of the French
Revolution and the passion for liberty that inspired many authors of
the day had slight influence on him.


THE MAN

  1. What fact in Scott's family history explains his great
  interest in Scottish history and tradition?

  2. What were his earnings from his writings as compared with
  those of other writers of his time?

  3. Would you consider his tastes democratic or the reverse? See
  illustration opposite X, 388. See also Thackeray's account of him
  under the title of the Baron of Bradwardine, XII, 66.

  4. How did Scott bear himself toward contemporary poets?

  5. Your opinion as to his hospitality? His charity? His industry?
  VIII, 206.

  6. What striking event in Scott's life conclusively shows him to
  have been a man of honor?

  7. By what appellation is he often known? XI, 289.

  8. His fondness for dumb animals was proverbial. VIII, 208.


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. In what branch of literature did Scott first achieve
  distinction? Why did he abandon it for fiction?

  2. Why did the revolutionary wave which so powerfully affected
  his contemporaries, Wordsworth, Coleridge, Byron, and Southey,
  leave Scott unaffected?

  3. In whose favor did Scott decline the honor of being appointed
  poet laureate?

  4. From what sources did he derive the materials for his poems?
  I, 181.

  5. Of his three best poems, "The Lay of the Last Minstrel" is
  considered the most natural, "Marmion," the most powerful, and
  "The Lady of the Lake," the most romantic and picturesque.

  6. Which is esteemed his greatest novel? Mention two novels which
  seem to indicate a decline in his powers.

  7. Was he greater in verse or in fiction?

  8. Do Scott's works give a true picture of the times to which
  they relate?

  9. Manzoni, Dumas, and Hugo all owe much to Scott. Compare their
  work.

  10. Is Scott more intent on his narrative and general scenes, or
  on drawing characters clearly and describing their development
  and change?

  11. Compare Scott with Dickens, Eliot, and Balzac as regards the
  traits mentioned in question 10.


"THE LADY OF THE LAKE"

  1. Had Fitz-James formerly visited Roderick Dhu's dominions?

  2. What was his errand this time?

  3. What period in Scottish history do you understand to be
  covered by the poem?

  4. Is the sense of honor and hospitality towards strangers
  characteristic of the Highland Scotch?

  5. Draw a comparison between the fate of the Highlanders and that
  of the American Indian. X, 385.

  6. In what sense are the terms "Gael" and "Saxon" used?

  7. Why does Fitz-James hesitate to fight with Roderick Dhu after
  being safely led beyond the Coilantogle Ford?

  8. In the combat was the victory won by physical strength or
  skill in the use of weapons?

  9. Which is the hero, Fitz-James or Roderick Dhu, and why?

  10. Byron surpassed Scott in poetry; can you see how? Compare the
  two.


FOR REFERENCE

  "Famous English Authors of the Nineteenth Century."--BOLTON.

  "Sir Walter Scott."--CROCKETT AND CAW.

  "Edinburgh under Sir Walter Scott."--FYFE.

  "Life of Sir Walter Scott."--LOCKHART.

  "In the Days of Scott."--JENKS.

  "Sir Walter Scott."--LANG.


WILLIAM WORDSWORTH

(1770-1850)

Wordsworth, the first of the English poets of Romanticism, came of
age just as the storm of the French Revolution broke over Europe. In
1791, after he had taken his degree at Cambridge University, he went
to France, where he spent nearly a year, fascinated by the struggle
for freedom, and only returned when his friends stopped his allowance
and so compelled him to withdraw from danger.

He deliberately chose poetry as his profession, working with
Coleridge for the purpose of establishing new laws of poetic
composition. In 1798 they published a little volume, the "Lyrical
Ballads," which marked a radical departure from the artificial and
affected style of the latter days of the Classic Age. (See also notes
on Coleridge, p. 70 of this volume.)

He eventually settled in the Lake District, in the north-west of
England, where Coleridge and Southey, the other two 'Lake Poets,'
spent many years. His income was a mere trifle, but he and his sister
Dorothy lived in tranquil simplicity on the borders of Grasmere
until his circumstances improved. In 1802 he was able to marry and
soon after he moved to Rydal Mount, a larger abode near by, and also
overlooking a stretch of water enclosed by the heathery mountains.
Here he spent the last thirty-eight years of his life, dying at the
age of eighty. Almost all the greater writers of his day were among
his friends and acquaintances.

As a lover of nature, delighting in travel amid lovely scenery, he
found his answer to the problem of life in the tranquillity and ever
present spirit of law and duty which he perceived in all nature's
forms. For him the presence of God was manifest in fields and
mountains, in flowers and brooks, as much as in the lives of men and
women.

Poetry, in his conception, was the preservation of impressions in
such form that when read it would again create those impressions.
Its language should be extremely simple, hardly departing from that
of everyday life and conversation. The petty incidents of daily
experience for him often contained such deep suggestions of beauty
and good that he recorded them at length.

It was this utter simplicity of attitude and tone that made him the
object of slashing criticism for some time. An absolute innovator,
his work was as absurd in the eyes of the critics as the wildest
freaks of the cubists are to us. At last he became a subject of
discussion instead of ridicule, then of praise, and finally of
lasting fame. Yet much of his work is far better unread to-day; only
in his earlier verse, when the inspiration of youth and the freshness
of his message still urged him, is there any true greatness evident.
His later work, like his later years, is cold and conservative. He
made no further progress, once he had given expression to his first
radical ideas. This tendency was rebuked by Browning in "The Lost
Leader."


THE MAN

  1. Did Wordsworth take an active part in the life of his time? I,
  180.

  2. How did Browning look on this side of his character? II, 265.

  3. What two poets were intimately associated with Wordsworth?
  III, 310; XI, 221.

  4. The following illustrations are closely associated with his
  life and work: III, _Frontispiece_, 322; IV, 178; XI, 228; XII,
  _Frontispiece_, 324.

  5. What influences molded his ideas of poetry and life?

  6. How does his length of life compare with that of his
  contemporaries, Byron, Keats, Shelley, Southey, Lamb, and De
  Quincey?

  7. Is it customary for a person to grow more conservative with
  age?


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. Are his poems uniformly of good quality? III, 265.

  2. What peculiarly English characteristic is present in them?
  VIII, 272.

  3. State Wordsworth's historical position in literature.

  4. Name some of his choicest short poems.

  5. With what school of poets is he classed?

  6. What element predominates in Wordsworth's poetry?

  7. What elements detract from his power, in your opinion?

  8. How do you rank him among nineteenth century poets?

  9. Does he fulfil his idea of poetry in his work?

  10. Read "The Daffodils," 339, and "Upon Westminster Bridge,"
  354. These are two of his best short poems. Which do you prefer?
  Why?


"ODE ON INTIMATIONS OF IMMORTALITY FROM RECOLLECTIONS OF EARLY
CHILDHOOD"

  1. How does a child view his surroundings?

  2. Why cannot an adult see the same objects in like manner?

  3. Is the Soul in existence before the body which it is to
  inhabit?

  4. What forces are constantly at work to crush and suppress a
  child's imaginative power?

  5. In what way is the shepherd boy the embodiment of joy?

  6. What phases of Nature are most attractive to all people in
  general?

  7.

      "Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player
      That stands and frets his hour upon the stage
      And then is heard no more."        ("Macbeth")

  Find passages in Wordsworth's poem which contradict this
  sentiment.

  8. Is this the best of his poems here selected? Why?

  9. Is the simplicity of style effective? How?

  10. Contrast with "We are Seven"; why is there so marked a
  simplicity in the lesser poem?


FOR REFERENCE

  "Wordsworth" ("English Men of Letters").--MYERS.

  "Story-Lives of Great Authors."--ROWBOTHAM.

  "Essays in Criticism."--ARNOLD.

  "Biographia Literaria."--COLERIDGE.

  "The Makers of Modern English."--DAWSON.

  "Essays on the Poets."--DE QUINCEY.

  "The Age of Wordsworth" ("Handbooks of English
  Literature").--HERFORD.


SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE

(1772-1834)

A victim of the opium habit after the age of thirty and by nature
irresolute and dreamy, Coleridge led a wandering life, leaving his
family with his friend Southey.

Most of his poetry, small in volume, though unexcelled in quality,
was written before he was thirty, "The Ancient Mariner," his first
poem, having been composed at the age of twenty-four. After this he
devoted himself for the most part to metaphysical speculation of no
permanent value.

He excelled all other writers of his day in dealing with the
supernatural. "The Ancient Mariner," his masterpiece, is a successful
attempt to revive the metrical ballad of the middle ages. By the use
of rubrics the medieval effect is heightened, while the introduction
of the wedding guest relieves the credibility of the reader by making
of an improbable account simply 'a tale that is told.'

He lived for some time at Keswick in Cumberland near its group
of celebrated lakes, where Wordsworth and Southey also resided,
and hence the appellation of "Lake Poets," given to the three
distinguished friends.

Joining with Wordsworth in 1798 in the publication of a little volume
of verse, "Lyrical Ballads," he became one of the first to give voice
to the movement known as Romanticism.


THE MAN

  1. What influence had Coleridge on the literature of his day?

  2. What is said of him as a conversationalist? As a critic? III,
  92 ff.

  3. Why is he known as one of the "Lake Poets"?

  4. Was he more useful to his friends than they to him, or _vice
  versa_?

  5. To what do you attribute the early decline of his poetic
  powers?

  6. What other English writer of the same period was addicted to
  the opium habit? IV, 171.

  7. What great mental defect militated most against Coleridge's
  success? III, 94.

  8. What traits of character especially endeared him to his
  friends?

  9. What can you say of his religious faith? III, 91.


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. What poets constituted the "Lake School," and from what lakes
  was the term derived?

  2. Name his three principal poems.

  3. What can you say as to the volume of his poetry?

  4. Between what years was most of it written?

  5. Are his other works--philosophical, religious, and
  critical--quoted to-day?

  6. In what one element does Coleridge outdistance the other poets
  of his day?

  7. Read the poems by Wordsworth, XII, 332-339; these were
  published in the volume, "Lyrical Ballads," with "The Ancient
  Mariner"; how are they characteristic of Romanticism?

  8. "Kubla Khan," like Poe's "Raven," has frequently been
  attributed to an opium vision. This cannot be proved, but it
  is well known that he dreamed these lines and many more which
  he forgot before he could write them down. In character it is
  closely akin to De Quincey's account of opium dreams, IV, 171 ff.


"THE ANCIENT MARINER"

  1. How old was Coleridge when he wrote the poem?

  2. What led him to write it?

  3. In writing the poem did Coleridge draw his inspiration from
  classical, medieval, or modern sources?

  4. Where is the scene laid?

  5. What is the purpose of the rubrics or running commentary in
  the margin?

  6. Why is the wedding guest introduced, and what is the purpose
  of the constant interruptions in the narrative?

  7. Look up the term "albatross" in reference works.

  8. What punishment was inflicted on the Ancient Mariner for
  having shot the Albatross?

  9. What broke the spell which had been cast upon him?

  10. What would the repeated allusion to the mariner's "glittering
  eye," seem to indicate?

  11. The moral which this tale is supposed to teach?


FOR REFERENCE

  "Coleridge" ("Bell's Miniature Series.")--GARNETT.

  "Coleridge" ("Lives of Famous Poets.")--ROSSETTI.

  "Selected Poems of Samuel Taylor Coleridge."--GEORGE.

  "S. T. Coleridge; a Narrative of the Events of his
  Life."--CAMPBELL.

  "Selections from the Poets; Coleridge."--LANG.

  "Table Talk" ("Bohn's Standard Library")--Ed. ASHE.


GEORGE GORDON, LORD BYRON

(1788-1824)

George Gordon, sixth Lord Byron, was born in London. His father,
a profligate captain of the guards, having squandered most of his
wife's property, she parted from him, retiring on a small income to
Aberdeen, Scotland. In his eleventh year, however, the son inherited
the title and estate of his grand-uncle, and the mother and son left
Scotland and settled down at Newstead Abbey, near Nottingham, in
Sherwood Forest.

Byron prepared for the university at Harrow and then went to
Cambridge, where he published "Hours of Idleness," a volume of verse
of no merit that brought down the unduly savage review of Brougham,
to which Byron replied anonymously with "English Bards and Scotch
Reviewers," a dashing satire that he later suppressed, when he became
a friend of many whom he there held up to ridicule.

Soon after receiving his M.A. he made a two years' tour of Portugal,
Spain, Albania, and Greece, composing meanwhile the first two
cantos of "Childe Harold," published in 1812. So immediate was its
success that he literally "woke up one morning and found himself
famous." Though not so fine as the last two cantos, yet they are
full of the new spirit of Romanticism. The poetic tales of "The
Giaour," "The Bride of Abydos," "The Corsair," and "Lara" followed
in quick succession. All this time he had felt financial pressure
and several of his friends had died, including his mother, whom he
loved notwithstanding her uncertain temper, so that his life had
by no means been happy, and the cynical tone of much of his verse
was a direct expression of his feelings. His health was also marred
by a tendency to corpulence which he tried to check by a rigid and
scanty diet, while a deformed foot gave him both pain and constant
embarrassment.

It is true that he was given to the dissipation then so rife in
England, yet although a libertine from the modern point of view,
there is not sufficient reason for the bitterly relentless tone
adopted by many biographers and critics. He determined to remedy
matters by marrying, but the experiment proved unfortunate, the
couple separated and at the outburst of public indignation that
followed, though unjustified, Byron went into voluntary exile, never
to return.

Most of his subsequent life was spent at various places in Italy,
where he completed "Childe Harold," and wrote "Don Juan" and a number
of shorter poems, and tried his hand at drama. For a time he worked
together with Leigh Hunt and Shelley at Pisa.

His life in Italy was licentious, a tendency that colored his later
works, notably "Don Juan"; although his intellectual powers would
seem to have grown up to the time of his premature death.

The close of his life went far toward redeeming his wayward career.
He flew to the assistance of the Greeks struggling for independence
from the barbaric Turkish rule, and devoted his means and his life
to their service. Finding them at sixes and sevens among themselves,
he showed the qualities of a statesman and soldier and soon brought
order out of chaos. But a few months' exposure led to a fever from
which he died.


THE MAN

  1. To what is the so-called "satanic" element in his life to be
  ascribed?

  2. Where were Byron's early years spent?

  3. In what manner did he acquire Oriental coloring for his poetic
  romances?

  4. What led to his withdrawal from England?

  5. Among his intimate friends were Moore and Shelley; Leigh
  Hunt, Scott, and Coleridge were also appreciative acquaintances.
  Compare their work with his.

  6. Give the circumstances of his death.

  7. Goethe refers to Byron's love of exercise. IV, 398.

  8. He seems to have been something of a dandy and a snob, but
  with redeeming features. VII, 38; XII, 89.

  9. Why is his life, as well as his work, typical of the extreme
  tendency of the Romantic Period?

  10. Read Hunt's account of Byron. VII, 217 ff.


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. Give Matthew Arnold's estimate of Byron. I, 190.

  2. Was he as fully equipped as Tennyson for the position of the
  supreme modern poet? I, 191.

  3. Does Chesterton's estimate of Byron coincide with that of
  Arnold? III, 267.

  4. As to Goethe's views of Byron's pictorial powers, see IV, 388.

  5. In his choice of themes, did he favor cheerful subjects? IV,
  388.

  6. Was Byron's early death a real loss to literature? IV, 399.

  7. Why were Byron's tragedies his least successful performances?
  VIII, 357.

  8. Is his fame destined to endure? I, 181.

  9. Why did Byron fail, while Spenser succeeded, in applying the
  spirit of his age to English literature? I, 180.

  10. What characteristics of Romanticism appear in his work?
  Contrast it with that of Pope and Goldsmith. Compare it with
  Burns.


FROM "CHILDE HAROLD"

  1. The selections from "Childe Harold" represent Byron at his
  best in spirit and in style.

  2. "Greece"; why does Byron use the phrase, "sad relic of
  departed worth"?

  3. "Waterloo"; show how the poet by skilful changes in wording,
  as well as in choice of expressions, works steadily to the climax
  of the last line. Note the breaks and varied measure of the
  metrical rhythm.

  4. Contrast the feeling in "Venice" and in "Rome"; in which is it
  more melancholy; more profound; more sentimental; more forceful?
  Why?

  5. Which impresses you more, "The Dying Gladiator" or "Laocoon
  and Apollo"? Which of these pieces of statuary do you think Byron
  was most affected by? Why?

  6. "Solitude" and "The Ocean" are famous examples of the Byronic
  attitude toward nature. Is this the same as Wordsworth's or
  Shelley's, apart from the difference in their styles?

  7. Does Byron ever leave his own emotions and personality out
  of his work? Compare him in this respect with Goldsmith, Gray,
  Bryant, Wordsworth, Tennyson, and Longfellow. Write down the
  dates of their births and draw conclusions.


FOR REFERENCE

  "Famous English Authors."--BOLTON.

  "Recollections of a Long Life."--BROUGHTON.

  "The Love Affairs of Lord Byron."--GRIBBLE.

  "Byron."--MAYNE.

  "With Byron in Italy."--MCMAHAN.

  "Essays in Criticism."--ARNOLD.

  "Byron and Byronism in America."--LEONARD.


PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY

(1792-1822)

Shelley was from his earliest youth equally distinguished by poetic
gifts of the highest order and by a reckless and ungovernable
disposition. After thorough preliminary education, he was sent to
Oxford, where he displayed rare literary talent, but from which he
was expelled for publishing a tract on "The Necessity of Atheism."

After eloping with the sixteen-year-old daughter of a retired
tavern-keeper, Harriet Westbrook, whom he married in Scotland, he
led a wandering life for a time until his financial position was
improved upon his coming of age in 1813. By this time he and his
wife had become estranged, and Shelley eloped with Mary Godwin and
settled on the Continent. Two years later his wife committed suicide
by drowning, and when Shelley attempted to secure the custody of his
two children, it was denied him. Shelley now left England for good,
visited one Italian city after another, and finally settled down at
Pisa. Keats, Byron, and Hunt were among his close friends. "Adonais"
is an elegy to Keats's memory.

His poems may be divided into two classes. In the first class we
have his three long poems, "Queen Mab," "The Revolt of Islam," and
"Prometheus Unbound," each an attempt to apply the revolutionary
principles of the period. In these he displays a progressive
improvement, appearing at his best in "Prometheus Unbound."

The second class, embracing "Alastor," "Adonais," and many shorter
poems, includes his subjective works. They exceed in melody and
illusive and mysterious beauty anything else of the century. The
spirit of freedom and the spirit of beauty were the subjects of his
muse.

With some faults he had much beauty of character. He was beloved
by all who knew him. He was kindness itself and spent much of
his time dispensing charity among the poor, even to the point
of self-deprivation. Easily excited to indignation at the least
suspicion of oppression or wrong, he was at other times the gentlest
of men.


THE MAN

  1. In what respect was Shelley preëminently a child of the French
  Revolution?

  2. Compare his religious influence with that of Tennyson. XII, 6.

  3. Give an account of his unfortunate marriages.

  4. What may be said in his defense?

  5. In what respect were the lives of Keats and Shelley similar?

  6. Read Hunt's account of his death and cremation. VII, 220 ff.

  7. Was Shelley irreligious? VII, 223 ff.


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. In what three poems does Shelley outline his views on human
  society?

  2. Will his name outlast the interest in his writings? I, 181.

  3. Why did Shelley fail in his attempt to apply freely the modern
  spirit to literature? I, 180.

  4. With what great poems is "Adonais" classified, and why? IX,
  105; XII, 47.

  5. What qualities characterize his shorter poems?

  6. In what respects does he outrank all subsequent poets? XI, 95.

  7. State the qualities in which he resembles Keats. VII, 380.


"TO A SKYLARK" AND OTHER POEMS

  1. Where does the skylark remain while singing?

  2. Which of the numerous similes that Shelley uses do you think
  most appropriate in a description of the skylark?

  3. What are the qualities of the skylark's song which make it so
  famous?

  4. To what does Shelley ascribe the unexcelled beauty of the
  bird's music?

  5. Is the skylark a native of America? (See encyclopedia.)

  6. Compare this with Wordsworth's "To a Skylark," XII, 340, in
  language and style, and in spirit.

  7. "The Ode to the West Wind" and "The Cloud" are especially
  characteristic of Shelley in his loftier flights of imaginative
  beauty. Compare them with Keats's "Ode to a Nightingale" and "Ode
  on a Grecian Urn," VII, 381, 383. Which of these is most vivid;
  which most musical?

  8. "Arethusa" and "The Invitation," are among his more vigorous
  light verse.

  9. Compare the powerful sonnet, "England in 1819," with Milton's
  sonnet "On His Blindness," IX, 119; and with Wordsworth's
  sonnets, XII, 353, 354.

  10. In his day Shelley was regarded by many as an atheist; an
  opinion which is no longer generally held. Does his work indicate
  atheism to your mind?

  11. Much of his work is impalpable, has insufficient strength
  to grip any but a mind with delicate powers of perception. Find
  examples of this characteristic.


FOR REFERENCE

  "Famous English Authors."--BOLTON.

  "Shelley, the Man and the Poet."--CLUTTON-BROCK.

  "Romantic life of Shelley."--GRIBBLE.

  "Literary Studies."--BAGEHOT.

  "Studies in Poetry."--BROOKE.

  "Essays on the Poets."--DE QUINCEY.

  "Leigh Hunt's Relations with Byron, Shelley, and Keats."--MILLER.


JOHN KEATS

(1795-1821)

The son of an hostler in a livery-stable, with only a partial
education, John Keats certainly would not be chosen as a possible
equal of Shelley, Byron, Wordsworth, or Coleridge. Yet such was his
genius that he attained this position with no other training than
came from his love of reading, especially in the fields of mythology
and poetry.

After a few years at school he was apprenticed to a surgeon, and
studied at the hospitals for a time, but disliking the profession
he gave himself up to reading and then to authorship. Shakespeare,
Wordsworth, the Italian poets, and later, Milton, were among his
favorites. He was well built and strong, yet exposure brought on
consumption in 1818, shortly after the publication of "Endymion."
Whether the decline in his health was due to the violent attacks upon
his poem by the reviewers or to the fact that he nursed a consumptive
brother for the three months preceding the latter's death is still
considered an open question by many. Shelley and Byron were bitter
against the reviews and attributed his steady decline to that source
alone. Meanwhile he worked on his last and greatest poems, while
his health went to pieces. When it was too late for hope he sailed
to Italy with his friend Severn, in whose arms he died a few months
later. Not quite two years afterward Shelley's remains were laid
beside him in the Protestant Cemetery at Rome, and in 1881 Severn,
too, found his last resting-place there.

The epitaph which Keats had inscribed on his tomb,

  "Here lies one whose name was writ in water,"

is happily proved false. Even to-day it is probable that he has not
reached the highest recognition which he is to win in the world of
poetry.

The one idea at the foundation of all his writings is the
much-quoted phrase which begins "Endymion,"--"A thing of beauty
is a joy forever," or as he expressed it in the "Ode on a Grecian
Urn,"--"Beauty is truth." He is the poet of the senses, luxuriant,
yet sublime. The Odes, "The Eve of St. Agnes," and "Hyperion" are
hardly to be matched in the whole realm of English poetry. Strange
to say Keats never studied Greek, leaving school before he reached
that subject. Yet his work is nearer that of the Greeks in its
exquisite balance of reason and feeling, in its absolute appreciation
of beauty, and in purity of tone and style, nearer than that of all
other English writers. But this is only true of his best work; in his
other verse he lacks in taste and proportion, lavishing description
without measure on every object of any charm.


THE MAN

  1. What was Keats's origin and education?

  2. How do you explain his poetic talent?

  3. Who were his contemporaries?

  4. What was the probable reason for his early death?

  5. What other poets of his time also died at an early age?

  6. Where is he buried and with whom?

  7. Are modern book reviews commonly unjust or harsh?

  8. Shelley's "Adonais" was written as an elegy on Keats, and is
  more like Keats's own work than any other of his poems. See if
  you can trace the resemblance in style.


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. Keats belongs to the Romantic school, yet he is so great as to
  possess certain characteristics of the Classic. What are they?

  2. What are the best lines in each of the selections? Why?

  3. What are the leading differences between Keats and Shelley in
  style and thought?

  4. In the "Ode to a Nightingale" there are several lines which
  might easily have been taken from Shakespeare, they are so
  similar to his style: can you find any of them?

  5. Have you ever seen a Grecian urn or vase? (See encyclopedia or
  other reference work for illustrations.)

  6. What English poet, much read by Keats, is suggested by
  "Hyperion"?

  7. Judging by "Hyperion," did Keats possess narrative power?

  8. Compare Keats with Wordsworth and Swinburne. Which do you
  prefer and why?

  9. How does Arnold sum up Keats's work? I, 181.


"THE EVE OF ST. AGNES"

  1. How many stanzas are introductory?

  2. Trace the growing sense of action in these.

  3. Is Porphyro like Romeo? How?

  4. At what general period in history does the action occur?

  5. Is the narrative or descriptive quality predominant?

  6. Note that the poet appeals to each of the senses.

  7. Give examples of Keats's eye for color.

  8. Is this poem superior to the two Odes? Why?


FOR REFERENCE

  "Keats" ("English Men of Letters").--COLVIN.

  "Studies in Interpretation."--HUDSON.

  "Life, Letters, and Literary Remains."--MILNES.

  "John Keats: a Study."--OWEN.

  "John Keats. A Literary Biography."--HANCOCK.

  "Studies in Poetry."--BROOKE.


ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON

(1809-1892)

Alfred Tennyson, generally accounted the greatest English poet since
Milton, was born at Somersby, Lincolnshire, where his early studies
were for the most part personally directed by his father, the rector
of the parish. He then studied at Cambridge, where "The Lady of
Shalott" and "A Dream of Fair Women," were written.

Criticism and the death of a dearly loved friend, Arthur Hallam, now
drove the tender-souled Tennyson into a retirement from which he
did not reappear for nine years. He was busy during all this time,
composing and perfecting "Locksley Hall," "Dora," "Morte D'Arthur,"
and other poems whose publication placed him in the front rank as a
poet. "The Princess" followed in 1847 and "In Memoriam," his noblest
work, an elegy on the death of Arthur Hallam, in 1850, seventeen
years after his friend's decease.

In the same year he was appointed poet laureate and married a Miss
Sellwood. Nine years later appeared his great epic cycle, "Idylls
of the King." In 1884 he was raised to the peerage. "Crossing the
Bar," published shortly before his death, was a fitting close to a
literary life nobly consecrated to the combat against skepticism and
materialism.


THE MAN

  1. Would you place Tennyson among the aristocracy of England? He
  is known as "Alfred, Lord Tennyson": was he of noble extraction?

  2. What position did he hold at the Court of St. James?

  3. Who preceded and who succeeded him as poet laureate? XII, 324;
  I, 235.

  4. How may we account for his strong religious bent?

  5. Locate on the map two districts intimately connected with the
  life of Tennyson, Lincolnshire and the Isle of Wight.

  6. Compare England in his lifetime with conditions in the days of
  Byron and Shelley. XI, 434 ff.


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. What poems are classed with "In Memoriam" as the great elegies
  of English Literature? VI, 106; IX, 105; XI, 95.

  2. What great contribution did Tennyson make to epic poetry?

  3. From what sources did Tennyson derive the material for his
  "Idylls of the King"? VIII, 262; IX, 15.

  4. Which of his poems was instrumental in establishing his
  reputation? XII, 5.

  5. What poem indicates his religious feeling?

  6. Name some of his best early poems.

  7. In memory of whom was "In Memoriam" written?

  8. Name three works based on the Arthurian legend; two dealing
  with the romance of common life; and two dealing with immortality.

  9. What are the principal excellences of his style?

  10. Compare "The Revenge" with Raleigh's account of the battle,
  X, 124, from which Tennyson took his facts and even his phrases.
  What does this show with regard to Raleigh's power as an author?


FROM "IN MEMORIAM"

  1. Find the two stanzas which contain the central thought on
  which the poem is based.

  2. What attitude did Tennyson take in regard to his friend's
  death?

  3. Why does nature fail to comfort human beings in this type of
  sorrow?

  4. Was Tennyson interested in social and political problems?

  5. To what Scriptural event yet to be fulfilled does "Ring in the
  Christ that is to be" refer?

  6. What traits of character does Tennyson exhibit in this poem?

  7. The marriage introduced toward the close of the poem helps
  to present Tennyson's eventual reconciliation with the earthly
  separation from his friend.

  8. In this marriage scene is Tennyson addressing his dead friend,
  or other persons? What phrases refer unmistakably to Hallam?


FOR REFERENCE

  "Tennyson and his Friends."--TENNYSON.

  "The Story of the Idylls of the King."--MCFEE.

  "Essays in Biography and Criticism."--BAYNE.

  "Tennyson, his Homes, his Friends and his Work."--CARY.

  "Literary Leaders of Modern England."--DAWSON.

  "Men I Have Known."--FARRAR.

  "Poets in the Pulpit."--HAWEIS.

  "Nature Knowledge in Modern Poetry."--MACKIE.

  "The Poetry of Tennyson."--VAN DYKE.

  "Tennyson" ("English Men of Letters Series").--LYALL.


ROBERT BROWNING

(1812-1889)

Of German descent, Browning was, like so many other famous English
writers, a native of London. His father was a ready versifier and
his mother an accomplished musician, and they encouraged in every
possible manner the appearance of like talent in their son. In
his youth he drank deep of those fountains of romanticism, Byron,
Shelley, and Keats.

His schooling finished and the tour of the Continent made, he devoted
his life to literature, producing a number of dramatic poems of more
or less merit. It was not, however, until the period 1841 to 1846
that, by the publication of the series of poems entitled "Bells
and Pomegranates," which included "Pippa Passes," he attained any
great literary fame. The latter play attracted the attention of Miss
Barrett, and led to an acquaintance which resulted in their marriage
in 1846.

The Brownings left at once for Florence, Italy, where they led an
ideal married life until the death of Mrs. Browning in 1861. Like his
wife, he took a great interest in Italy, and after her death his time
was divided between England, where his son was being educated, and
Italy. In the years immediately following Mrs. Browning's death, he
composed "The Ring and the Book," a long epic poem commonly accounted
his masterpiece; he continued writing until his death in 1889, his
last work being published as he lay on his deathbed.

Browning was a short, stocky, active man, mingling freely with all
classes of society and totally unlike the generality of poets. His
works largely reflect the man, one noticeable feature being the
entire absence of poetic melancholy.

Browning and Tennyson loomed above all the other poets of their
day, and their comparative merits were a fertile source of argument
even then. Both men were, however, too large to be affected by such
considerations, and their relations were always of the most cordial
nature.

Browning is deeply analytic, a trait perhaps derived from his German
ancestors along with his peculiarities of syntax and vocabulary and
his obscurity of expression. The latter characteristic has largely
discouraged the general public, so that the reading of Browning is
limited to people with a literary turn. His poetry is, however, well
worth the reading. He is by far the deepest poet of the nineteenth
century. He leaves environment to lesser poets and concentrates all
his energies upon man himself, his passions and emotions. His nature
is essentially dramatic, and had he devoted himself strictly to
drama, instead of lyric verse, he doubtless would have been far more
appreciated by the public. His poetic monologues, such as "Andrea del
Sarto," "Confessions," and "Prospice," dramatic in nature, are rather
hampered and confusing because of their form.


THE MAN

  1. In what place was Robert Browning born?

  2. Account for his musical and poetic proclivities.

  3. What incident led to his union with Elizabeth Barrett Browning?

  4. Florence has what connection with the lives of the Brownings?

  5. Describe Browning's life after the death of his wife.

  6. Give a description of his general appearance.

  7. What personal relations did Browning and Tennyson sustain
  toward one another?

  8. Who were the leading American contemporaries of Browning? II,
  293; VIII, 253; XII, 301.

  9. Give "Ouida's" opinion of Browning's moral courage. VIII, 107.


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. When did Browning first begin to write poetry?

  2. When were his last works written?

  3. Upon what models were the poems of his youth written?

  4. Which is considered his masterpiece?

  5. In what characteristic is he preëminent among
  nineteenth-century poets?

  6. State the defects in his style.

  7. Why is it proper to say that Browning is essentially dramatic?

  8. State the limitations on Browning's popularity.

  9. What form of verse in which Mrs. Browning was preëminent was
  never attempted by Robert Browning? II, 239, 251.

  10. Compare the styles of Browning and Tennyson as shown in
  "Hervé Riel" and "The Revenge," XII, 39.


"ANDREA DEL SARTO"

  1. In what country is this scene laid?

  2. Can you name a few contemporaneous artists?

  3. Had Andrea Del Sarto attained distinction as a painter yet?

  4. How do an artist's circumstances very often affect his
  paintings?

  5.
      "When the young man was flaming out his thoughts
      Upon a palace-wall for Rome to see"

  What great work of Raphael's do these lines suggest?

  6. Explain the following quotation of Agnolo's:

      "Friend, there's a certain sorry little scrub
      Goes up and down our Florence, none cares how,
      Who, were he set to plan and execute
      As you are, pricked on by your popes and kings,
      Would bring the sweat into that brow of yours!"

  7. Account for the different spelling of the artist's names
  (_e.g._ Rafael for Raphael, etc.).


FOR REFERENCE

  "Browning, Poet and Man."--CARY.

  "Robert Browning."--DOWDEN.

  "The Brownings, Their Life and Art."--WHITING.

  "Browning's Verse-Form."--BEATTY.

  "Browning and the Christian Faith."--BERDOE.

  "Literary Leaders of Modern England."--DAWSON.

  "Robert Browning."--CHESTERTON.


ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING

(1809-1861)

Elizabeth Barrett Browning, easily first among English poets of
her sex, was born in Durham. The daughter of a rich retired India
merchant, she was remarkably precocious, reading Homer in the
original, and writing verse at the age of eight years.

In 1836 the family removed to London, where she commenced her
life-work. Despite the fact that she was a chronic invalid, she
was familiar with the language and literature of several nations.
Her poems of this period reflect her deep interest in social and
humanitarian questions.

At this very time, when her fame far exceeded his, Robert Browning
called on her to thank her for a compliment paid him in one of her
poems. It seems to have been a case of love at first sight. They were
married in 1846 and soon removed to Florence, Italy.

The "Sonnets from the Portuguese," among the world's noblest love
poems, contain the record of her courtship and marriage.

In Italy she regained her health somewhat, and it was here that most
of her best works were written. She took a great interest in the
cause of Italian independence, as appears from "Casa Guidi Windows,"
and many lesser poems.

Although she began to write at an early age, she reached maturity
slowly, producing her best works only after her fortieth year. She
died in 1861.

Her characteristic note is that of sympathy, but her insight into
human character was not particularly deep. The greatest faults in
her style are vagueness and lack of self-restraint, probably to be
attributed to her extremely sensitive temperament and overflowing
imagination.

In the "Sonnets" these faults are not so noticeable, the rigid rules
of that species of verse restraining her within bounds.


THE WOMAN

  1. How does she rank among the women writers and especially the
  poets of the nineteenth century?

  2. What can you say as to the early development of her faculties;
  and when did she reach her full poetic power?

  3. What was her attitude toward questions of the day?

  4. What qualities would make her as much admired at the present
  time as during the period in which she lived?

  5. How were Robert and Elizabeth Browning brought together?

  6. Where did they make their home?

  7. Which was the better known at the time of their first meeting,
  Robert or Elizabeth?

  8. Where was most of her best poetry written?

  9. Why are her writings after marriage colored with Italian hopes
  and aspirations?

  10. With what essentially feminine attribute was she abundantly
  endowed?


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. Name her leading works.

  2. What unique position in the English language is filled by the
  "Sonnets from the Portuguese"?

  3. For what purpose did she write "Casa Guidi Windows"?

  4. Had she a profound knowledge of man?

  5. What particular defects strike one in her style?

  6. Why is she at her best when writing in the sonnet form?

  7. Compare her verse with that of Mrs. Hemans, Lucy Larcom,
  Shelley, Keats, and Longfellow.


"THE CRY OF THE CHILDREN"

  1. What protest does "The Cry of the Children" voice?

  2. Since this poem was written have steps been taken to improve
  the condition of children who work? Name some of the limitations
  of child labor in your state.

  3. To what country does "our happy Fatherland" refer?

  4. What potent evil now partially remedied by law was prevalent
  in the factories and mines of those days?

  5. Were the sanitary conditions of the factories regulated by
  law, such as light, cleanliness, etc.? (See encyclopedia.)

  6. How is the moral and physical life of a child affected by such
  close and continuous application to work of this character?

  7. What would Mrs. Browning make the guiding principle in the
  solution of economic ills?


FOR REFERENCE

  "The Book of Noble Englishwomen."--BRUCE.

  "Elizabeth Barrett Browning" ("Famous Women.")--INGRAM.

  "The Brownings; Their Life and Art."--WHITING.

  "Florence in the Poetry of the Brownings."--MCMAHAN.

  "The Letters of E. B. Browning."--Ed. KENYON.


WASHINGTON IRVING

(1783-1859)

Washington Irving has the distinction of being the only one of our
early writers of eminence born in the metropolis; and, with the
exception of Cooper, the only one born outside of New England.

The youngest son of a well-to-do New York merchant, he was born
in 1783, just after the close of the Revolutionary War. He was,
therefore, very properly christened "Washington." It is said that
some years after, he was brought to President Washington, who,
on being told that he was a namesake, laid his hand upon him and
bestowed his blessing. Little could the Father of His Country have
realized that the benediction would bear fruit and that the recipient
thereof was to become the Prince of American Letters.

Like many other authors he studied for the bar, but found neither
law nor politics congenial. Though well-read, his education was
unsystematic. His first literary endeavors appeared in "Salmagundi,"
a semimonthly periodical in which he collaborated with his brother
and James Kirk Paulding. This was followed by his inimitable
"Knickerbocker's History of New York," still among the greatest
masterpieces of American humor, which established his reputation.

In 1814 he sailed for Europe, where the next seventeen years of his
life were spent. Several years were divided between Great Britain
and France, where the "Sketch-Book," "Bracebridge Hall," and "Tales
of a Traveler" were written. Afterwards he spent some years in Spain
writing his striking series of works descriptive of Spanish history
and antiquities--"The Conquest of Granada," "The Alhambra," etc.

Returning to America, he built a beautiful home at "Sunnyside"
(rightly named for one who always looked on the sunny side of life),
where he resided continuously during the remaining twenty-seven years
of his life, with the exception of four years spent as minister of
the United States at the Court of Spain. These latter years were full
of labor, the most notable results being his lives of Goldsmith and
Washington.

His writings are distinguished by an easy grace, a flowing rhythm,
a light play of fancy and humor, a delicate and tender sentiment
sometimes suffused with a gentle melancholy, smooth and unaffected
narrative, picturesque description, and graphic delineation of
character.

Thackeray describes him as being in his family "gentle, generous,
good-humored, and self-denying;" and in society "a delightful example
of complete gentlemanliness."


THE MAN

  1. What peculiarity of birth distinguishes Irving from all other
  ante bellum writers?

  2. What was his education; his social position?

  3. Note points of resemblance between his life and that of Bryant.

  4. In what countries was a considerable portion of his life spent?

  5. Where did he spend his days after his return from Europe?

  6. What public service did Irving render his country?

  7. Summarize his character.

  8. In view of the many years he voluntarily spent abroad, would
  you consider him a patriotic man?


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. What work established his reputation?

  2. What writing did he do abroad?

  3. What are his principal serious works?

  4. State the prevailing characteristics of his style.

  5. Contrast Irving's humor with that of Dickens.

  6. Is his humor "American"? Why?

  7. Compare his style with Hawthorne's. Which do you prefer? Why?


FROM "KNICKERBOCKER'S NEW YORK"

  1. In proportion to its population, how would the record of crime
  to-day in New York compare with that in the administration of
  Governor Van Twiller?

  2. Give reasons for this difference.

  3. What was the Dutch ideal of family life?

  4. Judging from this account, was the social distinction between
  the different classes as great as it is to-day?

  5. What was the style of dress worn by the ladies of those days?

  6. Discuss its merits or inconveniences as compared with the
  style of dress to-day.

  7. To what extent would you consider this history authoritative?

  8. Wherein lies the charm of Irving's power as a writer?

  9. Compare the tone of this selection with that of "Rip Van
  Winkle."


FOR REFERENCE

  "Washington Irving."--BOYTON.

  "Four Famous American Writers."--CODY.

  "Irving" ("American Men of Letters").--WARNER.

  "Literary Likings."--BURTON.

  "Literary and Social Essays."--CURTIS.

  "Backgrounds of Literature."--MABIE.


EDGAR ALLAN POE

(1809-1849)

Although born in Boston, Poe was of Southern descent and received his
early education in England and Virginia. He belonged to no school
of writers. His works are _sui generis_ and bear no local color or
imprint.

Though a loving husband, he was throughout his life practically
without friends, his caustic criticism in particular making him
many enemies in the world of letters, with disastrous effect on
the reception of his writings. His life was consequently one long
struggle for bare necessities, in spite of which, working with
unflagging energy, he left behind several volumes of poems, tales,
and criticism of a high order.

The wonderful technique, faultless form, and painstaking choice of
detail, combined with the grotesque and morbid beauty of both his
poetry and his prose have secured for Poe an abiding place in our
literature. It is the perfection of literary style that has given
him his great popularity abroad and especially in France. Indeed,
Poe's neglect of the moral point of view and his constant achievement
of artistic perfection of form are French rather than English or
American characteristics.


THE MAN

  1. Poe was born in Boston. Would you class him with the New
  England school of writers?

  2. Where did he receive his early education? Does this account
  for certain peculiarities in his writings?

  3. Was Poe a man of warm sympathies?

  4. What were his relations with other writers of his day?

  5. Was the circle of his friendship extensive? What effect had
  this on his ultimate success as a writer?

  6. Compare Scott and Poe as money-makers.

  7. What is your opinion of Poe as a husband?

  8. He was not a hard drinker as compared with men of his time.
  The malevolence of his literary executor is responsible in part
  for the belief to the contrary. On the other hand his will was
  not strong enough to resist the insidious craving for alcohol and
  opium, and his high-strung temperament was affected by a slight
  quantity of either poison.


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. What rank do you assign to Poe among American poets? Among
  short-story writers?

  2. Wherein lay his strength?

  3. What elements of weakness do you observe?

  4. In "The Fall of the House of Usher" notice how the atmosphere
  of horror is fixed in the opening paragraph by a series of
  adjectives and adverbs expressive of ever increasing gloom and
  culminating in the word "torture."

  5. Compare the nightmare dread that is attained both at the
  end of "The Fall of the House of Usher" and in "The Cask of
  Amontillado" with De Quincey's description of the dreams caused
  by opium and the attendant melancholia. IV, 171-181.

  6. However, Poe was not merely recording fragments of opium
  dreams; the earliest prose work of the romantic period, now
  forgotten because of its many weaknesses and imperfections,
  consisted largely of just such tales of horror. Bürger's
  "Lenore," Walpole's "Castle of Otranto," Mrs. Radcliffe's
  "Mysteries of Udolpho," and Mrs. Shelley's "Frankenstein" were
  among the foremost of these.

  7. Can you discover any suggestions of religious or moral feeling
  in either of these tales? If so, do they impress you as Poe's
  actual conviction or as a part of the picture which he is drawing?

  8. Is this type of tale worth preserving apart from its
  excellence in style? Do you think it easy or difficult to tell
  such a story? Why?

  9. Is Poe immoral or unmoral?


"THE RAVEN"

  1. Why is the raven chosen as the bird of ill omen?

  2. Compare the raven with the albatross in Coleridge's "Ancient
  Mariner."

  3. It has been often claimed that the poem was written by Poe in
  a fit of delirium. As a matter of fact it was composed during his
  wife's illness and then polished into its present shape during
  subsequent months of grief. "The Bells" was written at the same
  time.

  4. "Annabel Lee" is another expression of his passionate love for
  his wife.

  5. "The Raven" is written in the first person. Is this
  characteristic of Poe? Does he gain anything by it? What does he
  lose?

  6. Whence was the name, Lenore, derived?

  7. What do you understand by the reference to "the Night's
  Plutonian shore"?

  8. As "The Raven" may be said to be the masterpiece of American
  poetry, so the stanza, "Then methought the air grew denser," is
  considered the supreme moment in the poem. Can you see why?

  9. For a critical analysis of the structure of this poem see
  Poe's essay, "The Philosophy of Composition," in the complete
  editions of his works.


FOR REFERENCE

  "Four Famous American Writers."--CODY.

  "Life and Letters of Edgar Allan Poe."--HARRISON.

  "Edgar Allan Poe; the Man, the Master, the Martyr."--LEIGH.

  "The Home Life of Poe."--WEISS.

  "Poe" ("American Men of Letters").--WOODBERRY.

  "The Mind and Art of Poe's Poetry."--FRUIT.


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE

(1804-1864)

Nathaniel Hawthorne, by general repute the greatest of American
novelists, was of sound New England lineage, and his forefathers
had for generations followed the sea. After graduating from Bowdoin
College, where he had formed a close friendship with Longfellow and
Pierce, he returned to Salem, resolved to take up literature as a
life-work.

Here he wrote for years, but with so little success that he was
glad to accept of George Bancroft, the historian, the offer of a
subordinate position in the Boston Custom House. He had, however,
just previously published his first work, "Twice-Told Tales," to be
followed, upon his retirement from the custom house with the change
of administration, by "Grandfather's Chair."

Some years after he was appointed surveyor of customs at Salem, then
an important port, and the succession of tales which had come from
his pen for so many years suddenly ceased. But during the following
four years of apparent cessation of literary endeavor, he was but
husbanding his forces for a final effort, and the year 1850 witnessed
the publication of his masterpiece, "The Scarlet Letter," the epic of
sin and remorse, by common consent the best American romance and by
many held without an equal, either here or abroad.

His old schoolmate, Franklin Pierce, having become President of the
United States, Hawthorne was appointed Consul to Liverpool, and upon
the expiration of his term spent two years traveling in France,
Switzerland, and Italy. The "English Note Books" and "Our Old Home"
tell of his life in England, and "The Marble Faun," one of his
greatest works, is the product of his wanderings in Italy.

His writings are distinguished by a wonderful power of analysis, and
a singularly graceful diction. He seems in a way the incarnation of
the old Puritan spirit, probes the innermost recesses of the heart,
and appears to take a strange delight in the darker side of life.
But he is in no sense morbid; his musings are merely the offspring
of a solitary but eminently manly spirit. All through his works one
realizes the dominating and all-pervading supremacy of conscience.


THE MAN

  1. With what historic towns do we associate the name of Hawthorne?

  2. What led to his deep interest in New England lore?

  3. Would you judge him to be a good business man? Why?

  4. How did he happen to visit Europe?

  5. Under what circumstances was "The Scarlet Letter" produced?

  6. How does Hawthorne rank among American writers?

  7. To what trait of character must his slow acceptance by the
  public be attributed?

  8. Was he a Puritan? Why?


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. Which was the first of Hawthorne's works to attract public
  attention?

  2. What rank does "The Scarlet Letter" hold in American
  literature? In world literature?

  3. Wherein lies its great hold upon the human heart?

  4. Name his works dealing with English life.

  5. What elements of strength do you discover in his style?

  6. In what respects does he resemble Poe; wherein does he differ
  from him?

  7. Is his work indicative of his education as well as of his
  character? How?


"THE OLD MANSE"

  1. How long did Hawthorne live in the "Old Manse"?

  2. Does Hawthorne show a detailed knowledge of nature?

  3. What qualities must a book possess to retain its interest and
  value for centuries beyond its time of writing?

  4. According to Hawthorne's views, what is the best remedy for a
  troubled mind or worn body?

  5. What qualities does Hawthorne's style possess which make an
  otherwise uninteresting subject have such charm?

  6. Notice the passages which bring out the personal character of
  the author. From these give a complete character sketch of the
  man.

  7. What places of interest in Concord attract visitors? VI,
  312, 316, also _Frontispiece_ and illustrations, 310, 338; V,
  _Frontispiece_, 82; XII, 116.

  8. Does this selection offer good material for illustration? Find
  several scenes especially beautiful in color or shading.

  9. What was Hawthorne's view of Emerson? Do you agree with it?
  Why?


FOR REFERENCE

  "Nathaniel Hawthorne and his Wife."--HAWTHORNE (JULIAN).

  "Memories of Hawthorne."--LATHROP.

  "Nathaniel Hawthorne."--FIELDS.

  "Hawthorne" ("English Men of Letters").--JAMES.

  "Life and Genius of Nathaniel Hawthorne."--STEARNS.

  "American Prose Masters."--BROWNELL.


WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT

(1794-1878)

William Cullen Bryant was born among the Berkshire hills, in Western
Massachusetts, the son of a country physician of limited means. He
did not complete his college course, and after devoting several
years to the practice of law, he removed to New York, where for
nearly fifty years he remained as editor of one of the principal
metropolitan papers. He took a leading part in all public affairs,
and was a most uncompromising abolitionist.

In appearance patriarchal, a "grand old man," he was lofty,
self-contained, and cold. He died at the age of 83, his mental powers
still in full vigor.

He was the first poet of high rank which America produced; and above
all, the first to paint American scenes with a discerning eye. His
poems are American in subject, imagery, and spirit. The volume of his
poetry is not large, nor is its range wide, but it is characterized
by a dignity and simplicity which imparts a peculiar charm.

His "Thanatopsis," written at the remarkably early age of eighteen,
was the first poem written on the American continent destined to win
enduring fame.

His works are almost entirely devoted to nature. Man is generally
treated merely in the abstract. In all his verse the tendency to
moralize is strongly apparent; but his writings, though instinct with
morality and religion, never rise above the teachings of natural
theology.


THE MAN

  1. What were his antecedents?

  2. To what extent was he an educated man?

  3. What was Bryant's calling?

  4. Where did Bryant's political sympathies lie?

  5. Was his personal appearance in keeping with his profession?

  6. What celebrity of antiquity would you say he most resembled in
  this respect?

  7. For what reason does Bryant lack in popularity?

  8. Though his first poem was his greatest, can we say that there
  was any decline in Bryant's mental powers?

  9. Does he belong to the New England authors or to the New York
  group? Why?


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. At what age did he write "Thanatopsis"?

  2. What unique position does "Thanatopsis" occupy in American
  literature?

  3. Were his literary remains extensive?

  4. What pleasing qualities characterize his style?

  5. His rank as a poet of nature?

  6. For what scenes does Bryant appear to have a special
  predilection?

  7. In which was Bryant more deeply versed, nature or man?

  8. What other poets does his work suggest?


"THANATOPSIS"

  1. What is the connection between the title of the poem and its
  subject-matter?

  2. How does communion with nature affect the thought of death?

  3. Is the description of death effective?

  4. What consolation is derived from the manner of our burial?

  5. Does Bryant consider preparation for death essential?

  6. Are there indications of youthfulness in the poem?

  7. Do any passages suggest Bryant's early home?


FOR REFERENCE

  "Atlas Essays."--PALMER.

  "William Cullen Bryant" ("American Authors").--HILL.

  "Throne Makers."--THAYER.

  "Bryant and His Friends."--WILSON.

  "Studies in Bryant" ("Literature Primers").--ALDEN.


HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW (1807-1882)

Longfellow was born at Portland, Maine, a lineal descendant of
"Priscilla, the Puritan Maiden." He was educated at Bowdoin
College, in which he was subsequently offered a professorship. To
prepare himself for the position he traveled extensively in Europe,
acquainting himself with its languages and institutions.

After some years at Bowdoin he was appointed to the chair of
modern languages and literature at Harvard. He now settled down at
Cambridge, which remained his home till the day of his death, though
he made several trips to Europe.

After several ineffectual essays at authorship, he won recognition
with his "Voices of the Night." Some years later appeared a second
collection of poems, "Poems of Slavery," which, with Whittier's poems
and Mrs. Stowe's works, were largely instrumental in stirring up New
England to the evils of slave-holding. Finally, in 1847, appeared
the greatest of all his works, "Evangeline." It is also remarkable
as introducing the dactylic hexameter of the ancients, ever since
popular in America.

In his choice of subjects Longfellow oscillated between America and
Europe, and, although he doubtless was not conscious of the fact,
his American poems were easily best; especially "Hiawatha" (based on
a Finnish epic, the "Kalevala"), "The Courtship of Miles Standish,"
and the "Tales of a Wayside Inn,"--all three of which may vie with
"Evangeline" for excellence. He was less successful with his European
poems, though "The Golden Legend," and his translation of the "Divine
Comedy" are good.

Longfellow made several attempts at writing prose fiction, notably in
"Hyperion" and "Kavanaugh," but none of his prose works proved to be
of any permanent value.

Longfellow was neither original nor deep. He attempts to discover no
new secrets in nature. But, like Scott, he was a lover of the heroic,
of the spirit of self-sacrifice. His poems, whatever their form, are
ever subjective, have ever a moral to teach. And so, like Scott, he
has ever been and ever will be popular. In England and Canada he is
said to be even more popular than Tennyson.

Of all American authors, Longfellow was the model Christian; noted
for his superabundant sympathy, love, and charity. It is recorded
that when Poe lashed him with his merciless criticism, he was
delivering enthusiastic discourses on Poe's poetry to his classes.


THE MAN

  1. What was Longfellow's origin; his education?

  2. In what respect does his life resemble that of Irving?

  3. His profession was literature. What chair did he occupy, and
  in what colleges?

  4. What interest, if any, did Longfellow take in public affairs?

  5. Give the salient points in his character.

  6. Was his foreign experience as significant as that of Irving,
  Hawthorne, and Lowell?


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. With what collection of poems did Longfellow first win public
  notice?

  2. What work links his name with those of Whittier and Harriet
  Beecher Stowe?

  3. Name his best poems.

  4. In which is the dactylic hexameter popularized?

  5. From what two sources was his "Hiawatha" derived?

  6. How is Longfellow's name connected with that of Dante?

  7. What are the merits of his style; the defects?

  8. Longfellow is easily the most popular American poet. Why?

  9. What British poet does he most resemble in his shorter poems?
  In what respects?

  10. What can you say as to his popularity abroad?


FROM "EVANGELINE"

  1. Who were the Druids, and why are they appropriately associated
  with the "forest primeval"?

  2. What is the present name of the territory once called Acadie?

  3. What lines express the central thought underlying the tale?

  4. What is there peculiarly appropriate in the words "turbulent
  tides"? (See geography on Bay of Fundy, etc.)

  5. Select a few of the most beautiful similes or metaphors which
  illustrate the poet's power of imagination.

  6. Is the cruelty of the English exaggerated?

  7. During what period of history did this event occur?

  8. What picture of Acadian life pleases you most?

  9. Compare this narrative style with that of the narrative poems
  of Scott, Tennyson, Macaulay, and Homer.


FOR REFERENCE

  "Life of Longfellow."--LONGFELLOW (SAMUEL).

  "Henry W. Longfellow, Life, Works, Friendships."--AUSTIN.

  "Henry Wadsworth Longfellow."--CARPENTER.

  "Four American Poets."--CODY.

  "Longfellow's Country."--CLARKE.

  "Authors and Friends."--FIELDS.

  "Old Cambridge."--HIGGINSON.

  "Longfellow."--NORTON.


JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER

(1807-1892)


Whittier was born at Haverhill, Mass., the son of a poor Quaker
farmer. His boyhood was spent at work on his father's farm and he
had few opportunities for schooling. But he showed his talent for
verse at an early age, and in this manner attracted the interest
and friendship of William Lloyd Garrison. Determined to obtain an
education, he learned the trade of making slippers, and with this as
a means of support was able to attend two years at Haverhill Academy.

For some years after this he led a shifting life, sometimes editing
one of a number of periodicals with which he was successively
connected, and at other times working the ancestral farm. In 1836
the farm was sold and the Whittiers removed to Amesbury, destined to
remain his home until his death in 1892, fifty-six years after.

Whittier was a Quaker, and, like most of that sect, a zealous
champion of abolition. To that cause he sacrificed ambition and love;
and, like most of the early abolitionists, he suffered for his faith.
While editor of the "Pennsylvania Freeman," at Philadelphia, his
printing plant was sacked and burned by the mob.

Whittier never married. His sister Elizabeth, who became his lifelong
companion, and whose verse is preserved with his own, shared likewise
in the war he made on slavery.

His poems may be divided into two classes: those descriptive of
rural life and scenery, among which the best are "Snow Bound," his
masterpiece, "The Tent on the Beach," "Maud Muller," and "Among
the Hills"; and his polemics against slavery, including "Voices of
Freedom," "Barbara Frietchie," and "The Slaves of Martinique." He
also collaborated with Lucy Larcom in the compilation of "Child
Life," "Child Life in Prose," and "Songs of Three Centuries."

Poetry was no fine art with him, and his verse seldom rises above
the ballad; but his style is characterized by great simplicity,
sincerity, directness, and fervor. The elements of passion and
sturdier humor are lacking, but he was the master-painter of New
England scenery, as evidenced in his "Snow Bound," the best verse of
that kind since "The Deserted Village," and "The Cotter's Saturday
Night." Rustic winter scenes have never been more beautifully
described.


THE MAN

  1. From what rank in life did Whittier come?

  2. What can you say of his childhood?

  3. How would his education compare with that of most of the
  authors of his day?

  4. The formation of what friendship had a lasting effect on his
  life?

  5. What profession did he enter in common with many other
  American authors?

  6. Of what faith was he an adherent?

  7. At what place did he live during the greater part of his life?

  8. Explain the part taken by him in political matters.

  9. What can you tell of his sister Elizabeth?

  10. Why is he called "The Quaker Poet," and "The Amesbury Sage"?


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. Wherein does his style resemble that of Mrs. Browning?

  2. What great poems of Burns and Whittier are properly classed
  together, and why?

  3. Name four poems descriptive of New England life and scenery.

  4. What are his best poems on slavery?

  5. In what field do he and Longfellow meet? VIII, 222.

  6. State what shows his great interest in children.

  7. What form did his verse generally take?

  8. How does he compare as to form with Poe and Bryant?

  9. Why is he esteemed the New England poet _par excellence_?

  10. In the description of what particular scenes does he excel?

  11. Give the elements of strength in his style.


"MAUD MULLER"

  1. What is meant by the "mock-bird" in the third couplet? Are
  these mocking birds in New England?

  2. Of what class is Maud with her "vague unrest" a type?

  3. Is city life still as attractive to country girls and boys?

  4. Is the Judge's aimless talk well worked out by the poet?

  5. Had Maud and the Judge married, would they have been happier
  in the end?

  6. Have lawyers changed with the flight of years?

  7. Is it true that "humming" is a telltale habit?

  8. What do you understand by "spinnet," "astral," and "chimney
  lug"?

  9. Point out a couplet which has passed into a proverb.

  10. What "sweet hope" is intended in the next to the last stanza?


FOR REFERENCE

  "Life of John Greenleaf Whittier" ("Great Writers
  Series").--LINTON.

  "John Greenleaf Whittier" ("American Men of letters").--CARPENTER.

  "Whittier-Land."--PICKARD.

  "Reminiscences of Whittier's life at Oak Knoll."--WOODMAN.

  "Biographic Clinics."--GOULD.

  "Authors and Friends."--FIELDS.

  "John Greenleaf Whittier" ("English Men of Letters").--HIGGINSON.


JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL

(1819-1891)

JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL, the son of a Unitarian minister, was born in
Cambridge, Massachusetts, the home of so many of our eminent authors.
Educated at Harvard University, where he also prepared for the
practice of law, he entered that profession, but finding it little to
his taste quickly abandoned it for literature. In 1855 he succeeded
Longfellow in the chair of modern languages at Harvard, a position
which he held for the following twenty-two years. During this period
he was for a time editor of the _Atlantic Monthly_, and the _North
American Review_. In 1877 he was appointed minister to Spain, and in
1880 was transferred to the Court of St. James, where he remained
five years. He died in 1891 at the age of seventy-two years.

Lowell was a many-sided character, eminent as a poet, an essayist,
a critic, and a public speaker. His friends included all the New
England writers of his day and many English authors, who for the
first time appreciated America's intellectual standing. His poetry
is very uneven; this is due largely to the fact that he wrote
principally for immediate effect, and, while his poems sparkle
with wit and humor, they very commonly lack polish and form. This
criticism would hardly apply to "The Vision of Sir Launfal," his best
poem, or to the "Commemoration Ode."

Lowell is probably better known as an essayist and critic, his best
works in this line being "Fireside Travels," "My Study Windows," and
"Among my Books." He was the leading American critic of his time.

In closing, two anomalous works should be mentioned. His "Biglow
Papers" are two series of satirical poems, ordinary verse rather than
actual poetry, but very fine as satire. The former series, published
in 1846, was directed against the Mexican war, and the latter,
published during the Civil War, against the slavery party. They
served to popularize the 'Yankee dialect,' here used for the first
time.

The second is the "Fable for Critics," a criticism in verse of his
leading contemporaries, like the "Biglow Papers," full of wit and
striking puns and keenly critical, though lacking in true poetic
value.


THE MAN

  1. What similarity between Lowell's antecedents and those of
  Emerson?

  2. How does his first choice of a profession resemble that of
  Bryant and Irving?

  3. Whom did he succeed at Harvard and what chair did he fill in
  that institution?

  4. Give his connection with journalism.

  5. What diplomatic missions did he fill, and what other famous
  American authors had filled the same positions?

  6. Did he, like Irving, Prescott, and Hawthorne, make any great
  use of his European experience for literary purposes?

  7. What impression did he make in England?


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. Mention seven different lines along which Lowell directed his
  energies.

  2. What is the principal defect in his style?

  3. What are his strong points?

  4. Mention his three best poems. His three best collections of
  essays.

  5. Against what evil were the "Biglow Papers" directed?

  6. What new element did they bring into American literature?

  7. Name a favorite poem in the Yankee dialect.

  8. Why is some of his verse scarcely to be considered poetry?


FROM "THE VISION OF SIR LAUNFAL"

  1. Compare "druid wood" with the opening lines of Longfellow's
  "Evangeline," VIII, 231, and explain the allusion.

  2. Point out the best couplet in the extract.

  3. What beautiful metaphor is near the close of the poem?

  4. What analogy may we draw between the tide and the year-cycle?

  5. What is the purpose of the first stanza?

  6. Explain the line "Each ounce of dross costs its ounce of
  gold," and find examples in life to verify it.

  7. What are the signs of summer?

  8. How does this season of the year affect the human heart?

  9. Compare the second stanza with the theme and the style of
  Wordsworth's "Ode on Immortality," XII, 324.


FOR REFERENCE

  "Four Famous American Writers."--CODY.

  "James Russell Lowell."--SCUDDER.

  "American Prose Masters."--BROWNELL.

  "James Russell Lowell."--CURTIS.

  "Essays in London and Elsewhere."--JAMES.

  "Nature Knowledge in Modern Poetry."--MACKIE.

  "Stelligeri, and other Essays."--WENDELL.


OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES

(1809-1894)

The "genial Autocrat" was born in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and was
the son of a Congregational minister. After graduating at Harvard, he
began the study of law, but, like so many other authors, not finding
it to his taste, changed to medicine. After finishing his studies in
Paris he returned to America, and opened office in Boston. Despite
his fondness for literature, he gained a fair practice.

In 1847, however, he was elected Professor of Anatomy in Harvard
University, a position he held for thirty-five years. His duties were
far from arduous, so that like Emerson, he was able to devote much of
his time to lecturing and poetry.

The founding of _The Atlantic Monthly_ was an important event in his
life. He was engaged to write for it, and the result was his greatest
work, "The Autocrat of the Breakfast Table," a series of talks on
many subjects, interspersed with some poems. Of the same nature are
"The Professor at the Breakfast Table," "The Poet at the Breakfast
Table," and "Over the Teacups," written at intervals of many years.
They are distinguished by careless grace and irrepressible humor. The
"Autocrat" is the most original and brilliant, and the series became
successively more serious as the doctor grew older.

These are the works by which he will be remembered, but, like Lowell,
he was a man of many parts, and chose to work in several fields. He
was eminent as a physician, lecturer, poet, and essayist, as we have
seen, and he even tried his hand at fiction. "The Guardian Angel,"
his best novel, "Elsie Venner," and "A Mortal Antipathy," have been
called 'medicated novels,' dealing as they do with questions of
heredity and prenatal influence.

He also appeared in the rôle of biographer, with the lives of his
friends, Motley and Emerson.

Holmes was a lovable man, genial, brilliant, witty, and yet deeply in
earnest for all that. He was a thoroughly religious man and a firm
believer in immortality, holding his life to be merely the avenue or
vestibule to a greater beyond. He was, however, conservative, and
took little part in the abolitionist movement which so agitated his
brethren.

He died at the advanced age of eighty-five, having outlived all his
companions in the field of letters.


THE MAN

  1. Give a brief account of Holmes's birth and antecedents.

  2. Where was he educated, and on what lines?

  3. What connection did he subsequently form with Harvard
  University?

  4. In what respect does his life resemble that of Emerson, and
  how does he resemble Lowell?

  5. Mention several different fields in which he achieved
  distinction.

  6. Give a summary of his character.

  7. According to Holmes, what is it that makes life worth living?


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. Which is esteemed to be Holmes's best work?

  2. Enumerate the four books of the Autocrat series.

  3. What is the general character of these books?

  4. What progressive difference is noted in the successive books
  of the series?

  5. Give the main elements of his style.

  6. Name three novels written by Holmes.

  7. For what biographies are we indebted to him?

  8. As a humorist compare him with Lowell, VIII, 255; with Irving,
  VII, 271; with Lamb, VIII, 73, 86.


FROM "THE AUTOCRAT OF THE BREAKFAST TABLE"

  1. Is there a moral to the poem "The Wonderful One-hoss-shay"? If
  so, what is it?

  2. When is slang permissible, according to Holmes?

  3. To whom does the title of this selection refer?

  4. Account for the sudden changes of topic and their diversity of
  character.

  5. What is the effect of the quotation connected with the poem
  "Contentment"?

  6. Is the intermingling of poetry and prose common? How is it
  peculiarly suitable here?

  7. What are Holmes's views concerning the literary talent of the
  United States?

  8. If the works of an author portray his character, how would you
  classify Oliver Wendell Holmes as a man?


FOR REFERENCE

  "Holmes: The Autocrat and his Fellow Boarders."--CROTHERS.

  "Authors and Friends."--FIELDS.

  "Old Cambridge" ("National Studies in American
  Letters").--HIGGINSON.

  "The Poet Among the Hills."--SMITH.


HOMER

(1000 B.C.)

The ancient Greek tradition assigned the authorship of the "Iliad"
and the "Odyssey" to the blind bard, Homer, of whose origin and
personality nothing is known, although seven cities claimed to be his
birthplace. More than a century of the closest study and research,
including the investigation of ancient Troy, has shown that these
two immortal epic poems are hardly to be called the work of one man,
but that they have been compiled and unified by one poet from several
shorter works, dealing with incidents leading to the fall of Troy and
the wanderings of Odysseus.

The site of Troy, close to the entrance to the Dardanelles, has been
occupied by nine cities, excavations showing their remains resting
in distinct layers, five of which belong to the pre-Homeric times,
the sixth being the city of the "Iliad," sacked in the year 1184 B.C.
Its fall was due, originally, to a dispute among the gods as to which
was the fairest, Hera, the wife of Zeus, goddess of earthly dominion,
Athene, goddess of wisdom, or Aphrodite, goddess of love. Paris, the
son of Priam, king of Troy, was chosen judge and awarded the prize to
Aphrodite, tempted by her offer of the most beautiful woman in the
world for his wife and rejecting the bribes of empire and of wisdom
which were offered by the others.

Helen, the wife of Menelaus, whose beauty was acclaimed as divine,
accordingly was abducted by Paris. Menelaus and his brother, both
powerful kings in Greece, collected an army with the aid of several
other Greek princes and set sail at once for Troy, which they
besieged in vain for nine years and finally captured by the stratagem
of the Trojan horse. This was a huge wooden figure of a horse, in
which certain of the Greek leaders lay hid while the rest sailed
away, apparently giving up the siege and leaving the horse as an
offering to the gods. The Trojans, rejoicing, dragged the monster
within their walls, broken down to admit it, and at nightfall the
concealed Greeks came out and opened the gates to the rest of their
army, which had landed again under cover of darkness.

Helen's life was spared, as she seems to have been regarded as a
being of another world, guiltless of wrong intent, driven by fate
into these misfortunes. The tragedies that befell upon the return
of Agamemnon and his brother Menelaus form the subject of the great
dramas of Æschylus, Euripides, and Sophocles.

The "Iliad" narrates events in the course of the siege, in which
Achilles is the Greek hero, angered by Agamemnon and refusing to
lead the troops to battle, until roused by the death of his friend
Patroclus he rushes to the fray and slays Hector, the Trojan prince
and leader, with whose funeral rites the poem closes.

The fall of Troy is not treated by Homer; in fact it did not receive
the consideration due its dramatic possibilities until a thousand
years later, when Vergil, the Roman poet, described it in his
"Æneid." This may be explained by the fact that the Greeks desired
to hear the tale of their heroism and their leader's triumph rather
than the sorrows of the enemy, while the Roman emperor Augustus, at
whose request Vergil composed the "Æneid," wished to glorify Rome by
tracing her origin back to the son of the Trojan prince, Æneas, who
fled to Italy after Troy's downfall.

The "Odyssey" recounts the wanderings of the Greek prince, Odysseus,
detained by various casualties on his way home round the south of
Greece to Ithaca, his island home in the Adriatic, and also deals
with his vengeance on the suitors whom he found endeavoring to win
the hand of his faithful wife Penelope.

The "Iliad," as a piece of literature, seems to belong to a somewhat
earlier day than the "Odyssey." The latter is more unified in
construction, and shows greater knowledge of travel and a higher
religious and social standard.

The selections of the former are from the two great metrical
translations of Pope and of Chapman. Pope's work (1715) is in
the full flower of the Age of Classicism, and is thoroughly
characteristic of that period. Chapman's (1611), less polished,
belongs to the late Renaissance, whose rugged, adventurous spirit was
far nearer that of the Homeric age and is preferred by many on this
account.

The prose translation, from which the passages of the "Odyssey"
are taken, is better suited to present-day taste, trained by prose
fiction rather than verse. It retains as far as has ever been done
the Greek feeling and ideas, with all its richness of imagery and
none of the affectation which we feel to-day in lengthy verse.


THE MAN AND THE AGE

  1. Who was Homer?

  2. What is the history of Troy?

  3. What was the value of its geographical situation in those
  days? (Consult an atlas, classical, if possible.)

  4. What was the character of social conditions in those days? See
  V, 432.

  5. Apart from scientific progress, what distinctions can you make
  between this era and that of Homer?

  6. The fall and sack of Troy is told by whom, in what epic?
  Explain why Homer did not deal with this dramatic episode.


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. Why has Achilles' fame lasted two thousand years? III, 266.

  2. What is one of Homer's leading merits? VIII, 356.

  3. What was Alexander the Great's opinion of the "Iliad"? IX, 8.

  4. Which do you prefer, the prose or the verse translation? Why?

  5. In what respects are the verse translations molded by the
  spirit of the periods when they were made?

  6. How is it that the Renaissance, when Chapman made his
  translation, was more like the Homeric period than the twentieth
  century?


FROM THE "ODYSSEY"

  1. What phrases suggest the Greek love of beauty?

  2. Do you conclude that the poet was observant of life in times
  of peace as well as in times of war?

  3. Had he ever lived on a farm? What makes you think so?

  4. How did Odysseus treat the minstrel? Was the writer himself
  probably just such a bard?

  5. Compare Circe's palace and the home of Odysseus; what was the
  probable status of the hero, king or chieftain? Why?

  6. Note the use of sulphur for purifying the house. What does
  this show you regarding early Greek civilization?

  7. Outline the social and political conditions of life in the
  Homeric period as shown in the "Odyssey."


FOR REFERENCE

  The "Iliad," translated by LANG, LEAF, and MYERS.

  The "Odyssey," translated by BUTCHER and LANG.

  "Homer and his Age."--LANG.

  "The World of Homer."--LANG.

  "On Translating Homer."--ARNOLD.

  "Ethics of the Heroic Age."--GLADSTONE.

  "Life in the Homeric Age."--SEYMOUR.


VERGIL

(70 B.C.-19 B.C.)

Unlike most distinguished Roman writers, Vergil was country born,
coming from the district of Andes, near Mantua--hence 'the Mantuan,'
as he was known to the scholastics.

After studying at Cremona and Rome, he returned to his father's small
estate and wrote pastoral poetry; but being obliged to flee when the
lands of Italy were assigned by the Triumvirs to their adherents, he
again visited Rome, where he speedily became a favorite of Augustus.
The liberality of Augustus and his own thrift enabled him to live in
comparative opulence. Most of his life he spent in retirement on his
estate in Campania. Here his time was given wholly to his art, except
in so far as he was taken up with scientific and antiquarian studies,
which he thought essential to elevate his thought and strengthen his
grasp of profound subjects.

His character is universally commended. He was gentle, innocent,
modest, and of a singular sweetness of disposition. He is generally
conceded to be the greatest Roman poet and the most patriotic.
Like other epic poets he was of a philosophic nature, and unlike
the generality of Roman writers, he was reserved as to his personal
feelings. He never married.

Before coming to Rome he had written his "Eclogues," the first of
Latin pastorals, in imitation of Theocritus. His next poems, the
"Georgics," were written to create fresh interest in agriculture,
which had been the mainstay of republican Rome but was fast falling
into decay. But his enduring fame rests upon the "Æneid," written
at the request of Augustus, which treats of the founding of Rome
by a colony from ancient Troy under the leadership of Æneas. In it
Vergil sums up the glory of Rome and its culmination under Augustus.
The "Æneid," the "Divine Comedy," and "Paradise Lost" enjoy the
distinction of being the only great epics written in the full light
of civilized society, and the inspiration of the latter works was
largely drawn from Vergil.

He was a master of literary form, seen at its best in the "Georgics"
and the "Æneid," though the latter is an unfinished work with which
Vergil was so little satisfied that in his will he directed its
destruction. This wish was rightly regarded as the fastidious,
nervous whim of the poet and was therefore unheeded.

The "Messianic Eclogue" prophesies the birth of a child under
whose rule the Golden Age with prosperity and happiness should be
restored to the earth. It is not certain what child the poet had in
mind, though the phrase, "a world by righteous father tamed," would
indicate a flattering reference to Antony or Augustus, who then
shared the control of the world. In the Middle Ages it was firmly
believed by the scholars that Vergil had been divinely inspired with
the knowledge of the coming of Christ, and his fame as a magician was
partly based on this idea.


THE MAN

  1. In what part of Italy was the childhood of Vergil spent?

  2. Why do subsequent epic poets refer to him as 'the Mantuan' and
  'father Vergil'?

  3. Of what court may we call him the poet laureate?

  4. Did Vergil realize that in the reign of Augustus the Roman
  world had reached its zenith? XII, 188, 189.

  5. Where was most of his literary work done?

  6. Give the salient points in Vergil's character.

  7. What element in his character especially fitted him for the
  post of Rome's epic poet?

  8. Did he enjoy "a long life's evening" to sing the praises of
  Pollio? XII, 190.

  9. Compare the civilization of Vergil's time with that of the
  Homeric age. V, 143, 432.


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. What rank is generally accorded Vergil among Roman poets?

  2. Name his three principal productions.

  3. The "Eclogues" or "Bucolics" were written in imitation of what
  Greek author?

  4. What field of literature did the Romans cultivate, which is
  best treated in the "Georgics," and almost entirely neglected by
  the writers of the other nations of antiquity?

  5. Give Montaigne's opinion of the "Georgics." IX, 209.

  6. Why was Vergil regarded as an enchanter in the Middle Ages?
  VIII, 95. Give another reason.

  7. What two good qualities of Vergil's character ennoble his
  verse?


FROM THE "ÆNEID"

  1. Æneas, after fleeing from Troy, sacked by the Greeks,
  encountered various misfortunes, like Odysseus, and at last
  arrived at Carthage, recently founded by Dido, of Phœnicia. He
  narrates his adventures to her, and she, doomed by the gods, who
  desire to keep Æneas out of Italy, is consumed with love for him.
  Warned by friendly divinities to sail for Italy at once, Æneas
  has already begun preparations for departure.

  2. The "Iliad" and the "Odyssey" were composed and listened to
  by men of action, familiar with battlefield, shipwreck, and the
  whole outdoor struggle for existence. The "Æneid" was written in
  a library by a gentle scholar for an audience whose culture was
  far advanced beyond that of Homer's warriors. In the main this
  fact is not immediately apparent, for Vergil was a consummate
  artist and took pains to prevent his work from 'smelling of the
  lamp'; that is, from showing its bookish and studied origin.
  But his phrases are hackneyed by comparison with Homer's
  "rosy-fingered Dawn" and "Odysseus of many counsels."

  3. Find contrasting passages from Vergil and Homer, VII, 79,
  illustrating the comparison in 2.

  4. Is Dido true to life; is her rash self-destruction
  convincingly handled by the poet?

  5. Æneas figures in this episode as the villain; what excuse
  could Vergil make for him which would be valid in the eyes of the
  Romans?

  6. What series of wars that almost overwhelmed Rome was carried
  on by Carthage centuries later? VIII, 198 ff.


FOR REFERENCE

  "The World's Leading Poets."--BOYNTON.

  "Stories from Vergil."--CHURCH.

  "The Æneid of Vergil" ("Everyman's Library").--TAYLOR.

  "The Story of the Æneid."--BROOKS.

  "The Country of Horace and Vergil."--BOISSIER.

  "Roman Poets of the Augustan Age."--SELLAR.

  "Old Pictures of Life."--SWING.

  "Great Writers."--WOODBERRY.


DANTE ALIGHIERI

(1265-1321)

Dante Alighieri, who ranks with Homer and Shakespeare as one of the
three greatest poets of all time, was a citizen of the Republic of
Florence. Though we commonly think of him only as a poet, his youth
was distinguished by gallant feats of arms, and he was later one of
the principal officers of the republic. But it was impossible to
hold office long under the turbulent city states of that age. Two
factions, the Whites and the Blacks, contended for the supremacy at
Florence, and in 1302 Dante, with many of his followers, was banished
from the city.

The remaining nineteen years of Dante's life were spent in exile, the
victorious party at Florence steadily refusing to remove the ban. He
appears to have spent the years wandering from one seat of learning
to another, and from one court to another, though but little is
actually known relative to the matter. His last years were certainly
spent at Ravenna, at the court of his friend, Guido da Polenta.

Upon his death the fickle republic attempted to secure the return of
the remains of its first citizen, but the request was denied, and he
still lies at Ravenna.

His great poem, the "Vita Nuova" (new life) would well have served to
immortalize him, but it does not compare with his "Divine Comedy," an
account of his journey through hell, purgatory, and heaven. It is one
of the world's greatest epics. The machinery of the poem was largely
derived from the medieval legends and passion plays. But whether this
be so or not, we know that Dante was thoroughly competent to have
originated everything which the work contains. He calls Vergil his
master, but while Vergil may have been his equal in style, he was far
inferior to Dante in constructive genius.

When about nine years of age Dante met and was filled with poetic
love for Beatrice Portinari. She married another, and after her
death a couple of years later, Dante married Gemma Donati, by whom
he had several children. Gemma, it seems, was something of a shrew,
and perhaps she cannot be blamed for not sympathizing with Dante's
continued love for Beatrice. At any rate, she seems to have been
a competent person, and when Dante was banished she successfully
claimed a part of his property as dower and maintained the family in
comfort.

We cannot of course know at this time whether Beatrice was a person
worthy of the adoration so abundantly bestowed. However this may
be, the undying devotion of Dante, whose nature neither time nor
adversity could change, has sufficed to immortalize her name.


THE MAN

  1. Of what stock was Dante descended? VIII, 263.

  2. Of what state was he a citizen?

  3. Under what circumstances did he leave Florence?

  4. How did he spend the last nineteen years of his life?

  5. What one element is most conspicuous in Dante's character?
  VIII, 368.

  6. State the facts in regard to Beatrice.

  7. Read Michelangelo's sonnet on Dante. IX, 93.

  8. Where are his remains interred, and why?


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. Compare Dante's view of life with that of Chaucer. VIII, 263.

  2. Whence did he derive the precision which characterizes his
  narrative? VIII, 263.

  3. Did Dante have a broad outlook on the life of his day? III,
  253.

  4. Compare Dante with Petrarch. VIII, 262.

  5. What was Dante's opinion of the Arthurian legends? VIII, 262.

  6. What was the effect of Dante's work on the language of Italy?
  VIII, 267.

  7. Compare the different modes in which Milton and Dante handle
  the imagery of their epics. VIII, 361.

  8. Why does Dante enter into such minute detail in describing the
  scenes he attempts to depict? VIII, 362.

  9. Which succeeded best in introducing the agency of supernatural
  beings? VIII, 363.

  10. In what sense is Dante's description of supernatural beings
  picturesque? VIII, 366.

  11. In what two respects do Dante and Milton present an exact
  parallel? VIII, 368.


FROM THE "PARADISO"

  1. The "Singer" is an appellation given to what Biblical
  character?

  2. According to this poem, are all souls of equal rank in heaven?

  3. What determines a person's rank there?

  4. Find verses which describe Adam and St. Peter.

  5. To whom does the following refer:

      "That leader under whom on manna lived
      The people ingrate, fickle, and stiff-necked." (See Exodus
            XXXII, 9.)

  6. How was Dante's life connected with the life of Beatrice?

  7. What do the "three circles" represent which Dante saw when he
  looked on Christ?


FOR REFERENCE

  "The World's Leading Poets."--BOYNTON.

  "Witnesses of the Light."--GLADDEN.

  "Dante and the Divine Comedy."--WRIGHT.

  "The Moral System of Dante's Inferno."--READE.

  "Introduction to the Study of Dante."--BOTTA.

  "Dante, his Times and his Work."--BUTLER.

  "Aids to the Study of Dante."--DINSMORE.


JOHN MILTON

(1608-1674)

John Milton, the son of a scrivener of some means, was born in
London. He studied in succession at St. Paul's School, London,
and Christ's College, Cambridge, and on account of his beauty,
and the purity of his morals, was known as the "lady of Christ's
Church." Upon graduation from Cambridge he went to live with his
father (who had in the meantime removed to the village of Horton,
Buckinghamshire), determined to devote his life to literature.
At Horton he wrote his early poems, "L'Allegro," "Il Penseroso,"
"Lycidas," and "Comus." "Lycidas" is an elegy in memory of his
intimate friend Henry King, drowned off the Welsh coast.

After six years at Horton, he spent fifteen months making the
Continental tour, and would have stayed longer; but the civil
war breaking out, he returned, considering it dishonorable to be
enjoying himself abroad while his countrymen were striking a blow
for freedom. He laid aside all thought of belles lettres and devoted
his pen to the cause of Puritanism, writing many pamphlets in
defense of regicide, freedom of the press, divorce, etc. In 1849 he
was appointed Latin Secretary to the Council of State, and became
the recognized literary champion of the Government in the fierce
controversies of that age.

Upon the restoration of the monarchy Milton was for a time in hiding,
but after 1660 was permitted to go unmolested. In his blind old age
he again reverted to poetry, and wrote the immortal epics, "Paradise
Lost," "Paradise Regained," and the tragedy, "Samson Agonistes."


THE MAN

  1. What political opinions did Milton hold? VIII, 390.

  2. Give your impression of his morals and personal appearance.

  3. Account for the three main divisions of his works--lyric
  poems, prose, and epic poems, with their differing tone--by his
  condition in life at different times.

  4. In what remarkable respect does Milton's character resemble
  that of the Satan of his epic? VIII, 367, 369.

  5. With what religious and political party did he ally himself?

  6. What office did he hold under the Commonwealth?

  7. In what virtues was he preëminent?

  8. State two circumstances illustrating the heroism of his nature.


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. What was the extent of Milton's education? VIII, 354.

  2. In what field does "Comus" stand among the foremost? VIII, 359.

  3. Which did Milton consider his best poem? VIII, 360.

  4. Compare "Paradise Lost" with the "Divine Comedy" as to the
  different modes pursued by Milton and Dante in exciting the
  imagination. VIII, 361.

  5. Are Milton's grand visions the result of inspiration or of
  industry? I, 404.

  6. Why is Milton so little read at the present time? VI, 279.

  7. Were the civilization with which he was surrounded and the
  learning which he had acquired helps or hindrances to the
  composition of a great epic poem? VIII, 350.

  8. Characterize the style of his prose writings. VIII, 394.


"LYCIDAS"

  1. What qualities are attributed to laurel, myrtle, and ivy by
  the 'language of the flowers'?

  2. Lycidas is the poetic appellation of what deceased friend of
  Milton?

  3. Who were the "sisters of the sacred well"?

  4. To what circumstance does the allusion to "the remorseless
  deep" closing o'er the head of Lycidas refer? And what is the
  propriety of referring to Druids and Mona in that connection?

  5. Who is meant by "The pilot of the Galilean lake"? Note the
  symbols of his office which he carries, "two massy keys."

  6. "Shepherd" and "sheep" are used in a metaphorical sense.
  Explain their real meaning. To whom do these terms refer in the
  Bible?

  7. Why are the pansy, primrose, jessamine, violet, etc., used as
  emblems of mourning?

  8. Tennyson's "In Memoriam," XII, 47; Shelley's "Adonais," XI,
  95; and Gray's "Elegy," VI, 106, are all laments of the same
  nature. Compare the four in style, mood, etc.


FOR REFERENCE

  "The World's Leading Poets."--BOYNTON.

  "Story-Lives of Great Authors."--ROWBOTHAM.

  "Criticisms on Paradise Lost."--ADDISON.

  "Literary Studies."--BAGEHOT.

  "Great Books."--FARRAR.

  "Among my Books."--LOWELL.

  "Essay on Milton" (VIII, 347).--MACAULAY.

  "The Age of Milton" ("Handbooks of English Literature
  ").--MASTERMAN.

Masson's annotated edition of Milton's poems is invaluable for the
student's use.


WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE

(1564-1616)

Comparatively little is known of Shakespeare's life. His education
was slight, with but "small Latin and less Greek," as his friend Ben
Jonson puts it. There is little doubt that the financial depression
of the times brought poverty upon his family, that he was charged
with deer-stealing by a local landlord, Sir Thomas Lucy, and that
he soon after went to London to seek his fortune, at the age of
twenty-one, in 1585. There he seems to have held horses at the
theater entrances, then to have served as "call-boy" for the players,
and by 1592 had begun to patch and revise plays. By 1594 he was an
actor, and made more money than by play-writing, although he is
nowhere mentioned as more than passable on the stage. Original plays
had already appeared from his pen, comedies and historical drama
first, followed by the tragedies, and ending with "A Winter's Tale,"
and "The Tempest"; the order of appearance as usually accepted is
given in X, 424. What with the success of his dramatic work, his
acting, and the patronage of the Earl of Southampton, to whom he
dedicated "Venus and Adonis" and "Lucrece," he was able to take
shares in the Globe theater, invest in land and houses at Stratford,
and at last retire, as he long had wished, to New Place, his
Stratford residence, there to spend his last years as a prosperous
landlord. He died in 1616 and was buried in the chancel of Trinity
Church, on the banks of the Avon. On the stone floor over his grave
is the familiar inscription:

      "Good friend, for Jesus sake forbeare
      To digg the dust encloased heare;
      Blest be the man that spares thes stones,
      And curst be he that moves my bones."

What books did Shakespeare read? Few, as compared with the average
author of his or any other age. Apart from the plays which he remade,
he gleaned material and plot from Plutarch (North's translation),
Holinshed, Geoffrey of Monmouth's history of British kings, now
almost forgotten because of its mythical medley and inaccuracy,
Boccaccio, Chaucer, and Montaigne. But the book of human life spread
open before him is the source of his characters and the descriptive
touches that lend vividness to his scenes. Falstaff, Lear, Rosalind,
Antony, Macbeth, and Hamlet are all taken from his knowledge and
observation of human nature in the living flesh.


THE MAN

  1. What can be said as to Shakespeare's private life and
  anecdotes in reference thereto? VI, 132.

  2. Did he take to the stage from choice? VI, 133.

  3. What was his reputation among his fellow playwrights? VI, 134.

  4. Of what faith was Shakespeare, and what was his attitude
  toward Puritanism? VI, 138.

  5. What led him to turn from comedy to tragedy after his fortieth
  year? VI, 142.

  6. Through what occupations did Shakespeare pass to reach the
  position of dramatist?

  7. Was he able to turn his experience to practical account?
  Explain.

  8. Was Shakespeare what would be called in these days a man of
  the world?

  9. Why do you suppose he wrote plays if acting was more lucrative?

  10. Show his application of business sense to his poetry.


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. Did Shakespeare make any considerable use of the pun? I, 13.

  2. To what do Shakespeare and his contemporaries owe their unique
  greatness in English literature? I, 180.

  3. Are his dramas all of the first quality? III, 265.

  4. Was it ever necessary for Shakespeare to 'court the muse'
  before writing? IV, 397.

  5. Give a classification of his works. (See encyclopedia.)

  6. Name his first poetic productions, and state when they were
  published. VI, 135.

  7. What is known as to the order of publication of his dramas?
  VI, 135.

  8. Which of Shakespeare's plays have endeared him most with his
  countrymen? VI, 137, 138.

  9. What plays were written in the retirement of his latter years
  at Stratford? VI, 143.

  10. Compare Marlowe's "Faustus," IX, 43, with "King Lear," XI, 3;
  and Jonson's "Every Man in his Humor" and "The Alchemist," VII,
  346-354, with "Henry IV," X, 424. What are the divergences in
  style; in method of portraying character?


FROM "KING LEAR"

  1. This act from "King Lear" is the most masterful passage in all
  Shakespeare's work. The characters are all of them tense with
  emotion, either grief-stricken or insane. Lear himself, at first
  vexed, then infuriated (XI, 7), broken with anguish (11), and
  apprehending madness (16), collapses and goes completely insane
  (19). Kent, his faithful retainer, whom he had previously sent
  into exile, watches him with a sorrow that is almost more than he
  can bear. The Fool, crack-brained and simple, is the blending of
  idiocy and shrewdness sometimes known as 'an innocent.' Edgar,
  Gloucester's good son, cast out by his shortsighted father,
  feigns madness for the sake of disguise. Each of these four
  characters represents a different psychological condition. Such
  a task as the dramatic manipulation of these personalities has
  never been attempted before or since. Madness, though a common
  subject with Shakespeare's contemporaries, has not elsewhere been
  handled with success.

  The use of prose indicates disorder of the mind; thus Lear speaks
  in blank verse until his intellect gives way (19), and thereafter
  only when showing the power of reasoning, as in the speech (35)
  on which Edgar makes the comment: "O, matter and impertinency
  mix'd!" The Fool uses prose or nonsense rhyme throughout; Edgar
  while playing the madman does the same, and assumes blank verse
  when he drops the disguise.


FROM "AS YOU LIKE IT"

  1. How is the title of the play appropriately suggestive of its
  tenor?

  2. Compare Rosalind of this play with Juliet of "Romeo and
  Juliet."

  3. What is Rosalind's object in deceiving Orlando concerning her
  identity?

  4. What part does Touchstone take in the play?


FROM "ROMEO AND JULIET"

  1. Select several lines which indicate the outcome of this
  youthful passion.

  2. Both "As You Like It" and "Romeo and Juliet" have the same
  theme--young lovers; compare the style of treatment of each.

  3. In each case does the language used suit the scene in which
  the play is laid?

  4. What difficulties does Romeo have to encounter to see Juliet?


FOR REFERENCE

  "Shakespeare, a Critical Study of his Mind and Art."--DOWDEN.

  "William Shakespeare."--WENDELL.

  "Introduction to Shakespeare."--DOWDEN.

  "Studies in Shakespeare."--COLLINS.

  "The Age of Shakespeare."--SECCOMBE AND ALLEN.

  "On Ten Plays of Shakespeare."--BROOKE.

  "Shakespeare" ("English Men of Letters").--RALEIGH.

  "Shakespeare."--SWINBURNE.

  "Tales from Shakespeare."--LAMB.


JOHANN WOLFGANG VON GOETHE

(1749-1832)

The greatest literary genius that Germany has produced was born and
spent his early years at Frankfort-on-the-Main, then capital of the
German confederation. His later youth was spent in preparation for
the bar at Leipsic and Strasburg.

By 1775 he had rendered himself famous by his drama "Götz von
Berlichingen" and his novel, "The Sorrows of Werther." In that
year he removed to Weimar, which soon because of him became the
intellectual Mecca of Germany. He found a true friend in Karl August,
Duke of Weimar, and throughout his long life occupied one after
another of the chief offices of that little state. In the succeeding
years appeared many dramas and other works, principal among the
former being "Iphigenia," "Tasso," and "Egmont."

The year 1789 witnessed the beginning of his acquaintance with
Schiller, then professor of history at Jena. Schiller had established
a literary journal "Die Horen," to which Goethe contributed his
"Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship." And in the same year, 1796,
Goethe and Schiller wrote between them some six hundred "Xenien,"
pithy sayings on the philosophic tendencies of the age. The next
year Goethe published his "Hermann and Dorothea," a romance in verse
and one of his best works. Schiller removed to Weimar in 1799, and
Germany's two foremost poets worked together until the death of
Schiller in 1805.

Until his death, twenty-seven years later, Goethe was unceasingly
busy. Not satisfied with being preëminent in literature, he plunged
into anatomy, vegetable physiology, and optics, in each of which, far
from simply playing the amateur, he rendered permanent service to
science.

Throughout his whole life he labored at that greatest of all German
dramas, "Faust." Begun as early as 1774, it first appeared in 1790
and then only as a 'fragment.' Urged by Schiller, he took it up
again, and in 1808 the First Part was issued; the Second Part, only
after his death, in 1833. This Second Part is as deep in its thought
and philosophy as any poetic work that has been written; it has been
the subject of study and meditation by all the great thinkers since
its publication.


THE MAN

  1. Give Heine's description of Goethe's personal appearance. VI,
  389.

  2. What was Goethe's education?

  3. Were Goethe's love affairs limited to his youth? IV, 372.

  4. What part did Goethe take in scientific research? VI, 237.

  5. What part did he take in political affairs?

  6. Name three eminent writers who visited Goethe at Weimar. VI,
  377; VIII, 174, 180.

  7. How late in life did Goethe retain his physical vigor? IV, 403.

  8. Did Goethe conceive of God as a personal being? I, 392.

  9. What great composer was among his intimate friends? I, 418.

  10. See Goethe's forecast of the construction of the Panama Canal
  by the United States. IV, 385.


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. Give Goethe's own statement of his influence upon German
  poetry and institutions. I, 170.

  2. For what reason is Faust not fully appreciated by the reading
  public? IV, 382.

  3. What was Napoleon's opinion of Goethe's works? IV, 401.

  4. During what portion of Goethe's life was "Faust" written?

  5. Name three other dramas of note by Goethe.

  6. The position assigned to "Hermann and Dorothea"?

  7. Who was the continuator of Goethe's work? I, 168.

  8. What was Heine's opinion of Goethe? I, 169.

  9. Was he the author of any prose works?

  10. From what you read of him in I, 168-171; IV, 371 ff.; VI,
  388-390; VIII, 172 ff.; do you think he belonged to the Age of
  Classicism or of Romanticism, or both? What conclusion do you
  draw from his work, its subject-matter, and its style?


FROM "FAUST"

  1. The selection from "Faust" includes practically the whole
  tragedy of Margaret's temptation, and forms a complete drama in
  itself. This is the central theme of the First Part of "Faust";
  in the Second Part Faust saves himself from damnation by
  abandoning selfishness and solitude and becoming a worker for the
  good of humanity, at one with the world.

  2. What is Faust's first purpose?

  3. Mephistopheles is to be regarded either as an evil spirit or
  else as Faust's own baser side, endeavoring to defeat the ideals
  of his better self.

  4. What does the character of Martha add to the drama?

  5. Compare with Marlowe's "Doctor Faustus," IX, 43, ff.

  6. Which is the more immediately powerful? Both are derived from
  a medieval tale and are related to the medieval morality plays,
  in which virtues and vices are represented struggling for the
  souls of men. Does Goethe or Marlowe come nearer to this simple
  form of drama in style? in spirit?


FOR REFERENCE

  "Life of Goethe."--BIELSCHOWSKY.

  "Goethe and Schiller."--BOYESEN.

  "The World's Leading Poets."--BOYNTON.

  "Goethe and his Woman Friends."--CRAWFORD.

  "Critical and Miscellaneous Essays."--CARLYLE.

  "Conversations with Goethe."--ECKERMANN.

  "Life of Goethe."--LEWES.


FRIEDRICH VON SCHILLER

(1759-1805)

Schiller, the most beloved of German poets, was a native of the Duchy
of Würtemberg. Abandoning the study of the law for that of medicine,
he gave vent to his literary powers by writing the romantic drama of
"The Robbers," produced in 1782. Meanwhile he had become regimental
surgeon and was obliged to leave his regiment without permission in
order to witness the performance. As a result he was put under arrest
and involved in further trouble, fleeing at last into hiding, under a
false name.

Drifting through the literary centers of Germany, studying history
and writing drama the while, he came in 1787 to Weimar, where he was
received kindly by the duke, Goethe's patron and friend, and soon
after met Goethe himself. Through the latter's influence Schiller
received a post at the University of Jena as professor of history,
and devoted himself to that subject; his "History of the Thirty
Years' War" belongs to this period.

By 1795 he had become intimate with Goethe and renewed his poetic
work, his principal dramas and "The Song of the Bell," all
belonging to this period. Of the former, "Maria Stuart" and "The
Maid of Orleans" deserve high praise beside his masterpieces, the
"Wallenstein" trilogy, and "Wilhelm Tell," his last and most popular
play.

His character was noble and lovable, and his work possesses a
high finish in style and a lofty vein of idealism which gives it
a resemblance to those passages and plays of Shakespeare in which
princes and potentates appear. He was a lover of the Bard of Avon
and translated several of his plays into German. But Schiller did
not attempt the many-sided portrayal of life that was Shakespeare's
forte; for him the presentation of high ideals and a majestic plot
involving the great motives of human action was sufficient.

Yet his thought is not so profound as Goethe's, and its expression,
on the other hand, is not so simple. The story of Margaret's tragedy,
in "Faust," is bare as compared with the plots of "Tell" or "Maria
Stuart" and the character development therein; but the lesson which
Goethe drove home to the hearts of men was more forcible than any of
Schiller's.


THE MAN

  1. What terms of intimacy existed between Goethe and Schiller?
  VIII, 182.

  2. Was his education calculated to fit him for the calling of a
  poet?

  3. Was Jean Paul Richter right in supposing Schiller to be of a
  strong nature? VIII, 175.

  4. What was the nature of his connection with Jena?

  5. In what respect did he resemble Shelley? VII, 222.

  6. Where, and in whose company, were his latter years spent?

  7. Compare Goethe and Schiller in character and in work.


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. In what two departments of literature did Schiller attain
  eminence?

  2. Which works treat of scenes outside of Germany?

  3. Name his four greatest dramas.

  4. Which of these is esteemed the masterpiece?

  5. Which first brought him to public notice?

  6. For what two great historical works are we indebted to him?


FROM "WILHELM TELL"

  1. What are the social and political conditions in Switzerland
  at the beginning of the play? How did they compare with those of
  other lands?

  2. From what class in society do the characters come? Is their
  style of speech consistent with their social position? Is
  absolute adherence to realism desirable? Why, and also why not?

  3. What is the date of this play and what great social upheavals
  had recently taken place?

  4. Why is Tell's son introduced?

  5. Is the character of Gessler too harshly drawn?

  6. The scene on p. 363 occurs at the close of the play; meanwhile
  previous acts have shown the development of the spirit of freedom
  in the hearts of the people and the determination to do away with
  tyranny. Does this justify Tell's act?

  7. "The Robbers" was one of the first products of Romanticism; is
  "Tell" also a good example of this age?

  8. Compare the style in "Tell" with that of Shakespeare and
  Goethe, making allowance for loss in translation.


FOR REFERENCE

  "Life of Friedrich Schiller."--CARLYLE.

  "Biographical Essays."--DE QUINCEY.

  "Goethe and Schiller."--BOYESEN.


CHARLES DICKENS

(1812-1870)

Charles Dickens was born at Portsmouth, England. His parents were
poor and luckless. His early years were spent in moving from place
to place, and as a boy he performed the services of a drudge and was
rewarded with a mere pittance. Such education as he received was
gained in the severe school of experience.

Hence it is not surprising that, after having been connected with
various newspapers in a subordinate capacity, when he finally tried
his hand at serial fiction he astounded the world in "Pickwick
Papers" by his wonderful descriptions of middle and lower class
English life; a work also unexcelled in its good-natured merriment.

"Pickwick Papers" and its successors were among the first of those
social novels which form so marked a feature of modern literature.
They waged open and successful warfare against many of the crying
evils of the day, such as the work-houses, the barbarous school
system in vogue, and the legal and prison systems.

Dickens was too kind-hearted to sneer, but his mocking humor was
quite as effective. He won the hearts of high and low alike, and the
sale of his novels was phenomenal.

In addition to rollicking humor, touches of satire and a pronounced
tendency toward exaggerated pathos appear in his work, the latter
quality especially in "The Old Curiosity Shop" and "Dombey and Son."

His creative powers were immense, the numbers of his characters
running into the hundreds. Though some of these serve the purpose
of lay figures, yet they are redeemed from mere puppetry by some
whimsical oddity that stamps the character indelibly on one's mind.
"David Copperfield," "Bleak House," and "Pickwick Papers" are usually
held to be the best of his work.


THE MAN

  1. Where did Dickens receive his education? Compare it with that
  of other novelists.

  2. Give the sources of his intimate acquaintance with conditions
  among the lower class.

  3. What moral characteristic of the man took the sting out of his
  satire?

  4. What great quality will ever endear him to the public?

  5. Where did Dickens make his home after his reputation had
  become established? V, 220.

  6. What was his attitude toward the poor after he had become a
  man of substance?

  7. Have social conditions in England improved since his day? In
  what lines and how?


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. In what is Dickens related to the period of Romanticism? Is he
  characteristically English? Compare him with Dumas, Daudet, and
  Harte.

  2. What beneficial effect has the reading of his novels had on
  everyday life?

  3. Explain his custom of running several stories at the same time
  in a novel. III, 254, 259.

  4. What is the true secret of his popularity? III, 250.

  5. Whence did Dickens obtain the numerous characters that crowd
  his pages?

  6. What art lies at the bottom of his comic masterpiece? III, 258.

  7. To what extent have Dickens's characters become common
  property of the race? III, 248.

  8. How does Dickens compare with the other novelists of the
  nineteenth century? III, 264.

  9. Does Dickens's continued popularity prove the contention that
  the public likes bad literature? III, 252.

  10. Which novel will endure the longer, that in which the
  characters are exaggerated and impossible, as his often are, or
  that in which the characters are carefully and realistically
  drawn? III, 266.

  11. Which is more popular at the present time, Dickens or
  Kipling? III, 249.

  12. What work brought Dickens into public notice?

  13. Name three novels in which pathos predominates.

  14. Which is considered his greatest work?

  15. Dickens and Hood were masters of both humor and pathos, the
  one as a novelist, the other as a poet. Compare them in these
  qualities.


FROM "PICKWICK PAPERS"

  1. Is this style clear and forcible? Why?

  2. Is Mr. Magnus a common character of to-day whom one may meet
  while traveling?

  3. Would you expect to see the White Horse Inn at Ipswich if you
  were in England?

  4. Draw a character sketch of Mr. Pickwick.

  5. When reading a story is it more effective when dialect is
  introduced? How far may the use of dialect be carried?

  6. Do you notice any exaggeration in incident or description? If
  so what purpose does it serve?

  7. Contrast the description of the temperance meeting with
  Dickens's attitude on other social reforms.

  8. Is this satire justified on any grounds then or now?


FOR REFERENCE

  "The Life of Charles Dickens."--FORSTER.

  "Charles Dickens."--CHESTERTON.

  "Life of Charles Dickens as Revealed in his
  Writings."--FITZGERALD.

  "Great English Novelists."--DAWSON.

  "Charles Dickens and His Girl Heroines."--MOSES.

  "Dickens" ("English Men of Letters").--WARD.

  "Masters of the English Novel."--BURTON.


WILLIAM MAKEPEACE THACKERAY

(1811-1863)

The novelist was born in Calcutta, India; he was sent to Cambridge
University. Here he was an intimate friend of Tennyson and Fitzgerald
(translator of the "Rubáiyát"). After losing his money in various
newspaper deals, he settled down in London as a literary hack. His
genius soon attracted the attention of "Punch," which welcomed his
sketches and satires against snobbery.

"Vanity Fair" in 1847 finally raised him to the highest rank among
writers of fiction. "Pendennis" followed, and a little later "Henry
Esmond," the equal of "Vanity Fair." Its sequel, "The Virginians,"
was not so powerful.

Thackeray came to the United States in 1852 and delivered his
lectures on "The English Humorists." So pleased was he with the
country that he returned again three years later and lectured on
"The Four Georges." During these trips he became acquainted with the
leading American writers of the day.


THE MAN

  1. With what noted English periodical was he connected?

  2. Did he soon show an aptitude for fiction?

  3. What authors were numbered among his most intimate friends?

  4. What other eminent English writer was born in India? VIII, 3.

  5. Describe his American visits.

  6. Is the vein of cynicism which runs through his writings
  indicative of his real character?


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. Was Thackeray a realist? III, 266, 267.

  2. Upon what was his creation of character based?

  3. What great service did he render English society?

  4. Which of his works were delivered in America in the form of
  lectures?

  5. Which were particularly aimed at British snobbery?

  6. Why is Dickens more popular than Thackeray? III, 248.

  7. For which may we expect the more enduring fame? III, 264.

  8. Read his metrical translations from Beranger. I, 428-431.

  9. Which two novels are considered his masterpieces?

  10. Was his work characteristically English, as contrasted with
  that of other nations?


"CLUB SNOBS"

  1. Why should bachelors be excluded from the luxuries of Clubs?

  2. To whom should the privilege of attending these institutions
  be given and during what hours?

  3. What evils are attributed to these institutions; wrongly or
  otherwise?

  4. In general do women's clubs or men's clubs exert a more
  beneficial influence on the surrounding community?

  5. How serious is the author?


"THE SNOB ROYAL"

  1. What queen of England is alluded to by "her present Majesty"?
  (See the dates of Thackeray's life.)

  2. How does Thackeray's definition of a "Snob" compare with your
  conception of this type of person?

  3. From your own knowledge of Charles II, do you consider him
  worthy of the title "snob"?

  4. Compare Chesterfield's ideas of a gentleman with Thackeray's.
  III, 240-247.

  5. Thackeray wrote several parodies of successful novels; which
  type does he satirize in the opening paragraph of this essay?

  6. 'The Baron of Bradwardine' refers to Scott; do you agree with
  Thackeray's condemnation of Scott's conduct? Why? Why not?


FOR REFERENCE

  "Life of Thackeray."--BENJAMIN.

  "Thackeray."--CHESTERTON.

  "Great English Novelists."--JACKSON.

  "Literary Studies."--BAGEHOT.

  "The Thackeray Country."--BENJAMIN.

  "Victorian Prose Masters."--BROWNELL.

  "Thackeray's Haunts and Homes."--CROWE.

  "With Thackeray in America."--CROWE.


SAMUEL JOHNSON

(1709-1784)

Johnson was born at Lichfield, Staffordshire, and studied at Oxford.
His early years were one continuous struggle with poverty, first as a
teacher at Lichfield and other places and afterwards as a hack writer
in London. During the latter period, besides his ordinary duties as
an editor of various magazines, he found time to turn his hand to the
most diverse forms of literature. He wrote poems, "London" and the
"Vanity of Human Wishes"; a drama, "Irene"; a philosophic romance,
"Rasselas, Prince of Abyssinia"; two series of essays, the "Rambler"
and the "Idler," after the model of Addison's "Spectator"; and
prepared the first English dictionary.

In 1862 he was granted a pension of £300 by Lord Bute, from which
time dates his literary dictatorship. His only subsequent works of
importance were his "Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland" and
his "Lives of the Poets." The latter is his best work and one of the
monuments of English criticism in spite of its prejudiced tone.

During the latter half of his life he gathered about him a coterie
of the most intellectual men of the day, nearly all of whom belonged
to the literary society known as the Club. Burke, Goldsmith, Gibbon,
Garrick, Reynolds, and Boswell were among his intimates.


THE MAN

  1. To see Johnson, the thinker and the man, read Boswell's
  "Life," II, 100 ff., and then take up the following questions:

  2. What attitude did Johnson maintain toward religious questions?

  3. Quote Goldsmith on his roughness of manner.

  4. What was Johnson's opinion of the married state?

  5. Would you judge him to have been of a harsh or tender
  disposition?

  6. See Frances Burney's account of his sociability. II, 339 ff.

  7. In what respect was the Doctor a typical Anglo-Saxon? VIII,
  259.

  8. What distinguishes Boswell from most biographers? II, 100.

  9. Where did Johnson win his fame, in writing, or in society?

  10. Is he a true follower of the spirit of Classicism?


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. What peculiar position did Johnson occupy in the literary
  world of his day?

  2. If Johnson is to be called heroic for having kept at his
  dictionary until its completion, why should not the term be
  applied to later lexicographers, whose dictionaries are much more
  extensive?

  3. Under what circumstances does Johnson justify dissimulation?

  4. Was his criticism of Milton fair? VIII, 350.

  5. Why was he a poor critic of the Latin productions of modern
  writers? VIII, 354.

  6. Give Johnson's view of death.

  7. By what works is he best known?

  8. Is he comparable with Addison as an essayist in your opinion?
  Why?


"THE VALLEY OF HAPPINESS"

  1. 'The father of waters' is an appellation applied to what
  African stream?

  2. Can man be truly happy with luxury alone?

  3. What occupations give the greatest pleasure to the normal
  person?

  4. How long is the active life of the average man or woman?

  5. The power to enjoy our blessings is enhanced by what knowledge
  or experience?

  6. In the description of the Valley of Happiness, find some
  combinations of setting which would not hold in real life.

  7. Judging from this selection, would the human race be contented
  in utter idleness?

  8. What moral did Johnson wish to teach by this piece?

  9. Would Johnson deserve immortality simply on the merits of
  this, one of his best pieces of literary work?


FOR REFERENCE

  "Life of Johnson."--BOSWELL.

  "Dr. Johnson" ("Bell's Miniature series").--DENNIS.

  "Life of Johnson."--MACAULAY.

  "Six Essays on Johnson."--RALEIGH.

  "Doctor Johnson and Mrs. Thrale."--BROADLEY.

  "Essay on Boswell's Johnson."--CARLYLE.


OLIVER GOLDSMITH

(1728-1774)

Goldsmith was born in central Ireland, where his father was a
clergyman of the Established Church of England. His youth gave little
promise of future eminence. Educated at Trinity College, Dublin,
after various escapades he was sent by his uncle to study medicine in
Edinburgh. After a few months of study he started on a four years'
vagabond trip, during which he made the tour of Western Europe on
foot, paying his way with his flute.

Returning to England he was by turns a physician, proofreader,
teacher, and hack writer. In the latter capacity he came in contact
with Dr. Johnson, and was one of the nine charter members of the
Club, a literary society over which Johnson held genial sway. The
next year appeared his first work of any value, the poem, "The
Traveler." A year later he published his only novel, "The Vicar of
Wakefield," still one of the most popular of stories. From this he
turned to the drama and produced "The Good-Natured Man," and "She
Stoops to Conquer," the latter unsurpassed among later English
comedies. At some time prior to this appeared his greatest poem, "The
Deserted Village."

In character he was a strange mixture of generosity and vanity; the
butt and yet the envy of his many friends, uncouth in appearance and
yet gifted with so lucid a style.


THE MAN

  1. Goldsmith was educated at the same college as Burke: did he
  benefit as greatly?

  2. Under what circumstances did he make the tour of the Continent?

  3. Were his habits of dress eccentric? II, 115.

  4. He was a member of what celebrated literary coterie?

  5. What were his principal traits?

  6. What was his opinion of his friend Johnson? II, 110, 122.


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. Give Johnson's estimate of the "Good-Natured Man." II, 103.

  2. Was Goldsmith a productive poet? See Goethe's statement to
  Eckermann. IV, 393.

  3. Name the principal prose writers of his time. II, 100, 331; V,
  193, 406; VII, 334; XI, 294.

  4. What other poet wrote at this period? VI, 106.

  5. The style of Goldsmith is in imitation of what poet? X, 64.

  6. What defects mar his writings?

  7. Name three of his works in different departments of
  literature, any one of which would have served to establish his
  reputation.

  8. What poem brought him into public notice?


"THE DESERTED VILLAGE"

  1. What is the economic effect on a community when one large
  landholder possesses the entire land?

  2. The "bold peasantry" of England are similar to what class in
  America?

  3. What was Goldsmith's ideal of a happy old age?

  4. To what qualities of character was the attracting power of the
  village preacher due?

  5. What were the qualifications of a rustic school teacher in
  Goldsmith's time?

  6. Why is wealth a barren possession?

  7. Name some of the disagreeable surroundings of a life in the
  tropics.

  8. What plan does Goldsmith recommend to remedy the evils of the
  present social system?

  9. What is your judgment of the style of this poem?

  10. Does Goldsmith's description ring true?

  11. As an example of the influence of Classicism, compare it
  with Milton's "L'Allegro" and "Il Penseroso," IX, 110, of the
  Renaissance, and "The Cotter's Saturday Night," II, 343, of the
  Romantic Period.


FOR REFERENCE

  "Goldsmith" ("English Men of Letters").--BLACK.

  "Oliver Goldsmith" ("Bell's Miniature Series").--BUCKLAND.

  "Biographical Essays."--MACAULAY.

  "Story-Lives of Great Authors."--ROWBOTHAM.

  "Essays on the Poets."--DE QUINCEY.

  "A Paladin of Philanthropy."--DOBSON.


THOMAS GRAY

(1716-1771)

After studying at Eton and at Cambridge University, Gray made
the customary tour of the Continent and then settled down to a
retired life among his books. His circle of friends was small but
intellectual. He spent most of his life at Cambridge, reading and
thinking.

In disposition he was very reserved, seldom revealing his feelings.
As he was sensitive and also rather melancholy it was natural that he
should find few intimates. Always a student, he none the less applied
himself to those topics only which attracted him, neglecting such
portions of the subject as did not appeal to him, so that although
one of the most learned men of his time he did not receive public
recognition until his appointment as regius professor of history and
modern languages at Cambridge, three years before his death.

The Age of Classicism, in which he lived, was repugnant to him; its
formal standards, as expressed especially by the poetry of Pope,
offended his fastidious taste, which was charmed by the wild beauty
of nature and longed for freedom of expression and avoidance of
convention in literary art.

He was the forerunner of the Romantic spirit. Had he lived forty
years later he would have been far more productive; the poetry of
Wordsworth, Byron, and the rest of that dazzling group of poets would
have strengthened and enthused him.

What little he wrote bears witness to the scholarship, refinement,
and depth of feeling of the recluse. His "Elegy," meditated in Stoke
Pogis churchyard near his mother's home, where he spent the summer,
is probably the most thoroughly English poem ever written. It was
begun in 1742 and finished in 1750; during the interval it was
polished and revised so effectively that not a word can be altered
without detracting from its symmetry and splendor. The dignity of
the classic spirit and the wistful grace of Romanticism are both
apparent, but the keynote is quiet, simple love of everyday life
tinged with moral reflection, the note sounded again and again in
English poetry and prose.


THE MAN

  1. What was Gray's education; did he travel?

  2. What was his nature?

  3. How did he spend his life?

  4. What was the character of the age in which he lived?

  5. What influence did this period have upon Gray?

  6. In what period would he have been more active?

  7. How did he show national tendencies in his work?


"ELEGY WRITTEN IN A COUNTRY CHURCHYARD"

  1. Select stanzas representative of the Romantic spirit.

  2. Select stanzas that are Classic in tone.

  3. Point out the ideas or phrases in each which lead you to make
  the classification.

  4. Sketch roughly on separate sheets of paper the outlines of the
  pictures in each stanza.

  5. Compare the pictures in the poem with those in Milton's
  "L'Allegro" and "Il Penseroso," IX, 110.

  6. Compare the poem also with Goldsmith's "Deserted Village," VI,
  94.

  7. What phrases or passages impress you as being especially
  English in tone? Why?

  8. What changes would you expect to find in a modern English
  village neighborhood?

  9. Where do you observe traces of Gray's scholarship?

  10. Select the best stanzas and explain their superiority.

  11. Do any lines suggest Gray's sensitive dislike of the spirit
  of his times and the melancholy reserve in his nature? Which
  lines?


FOR REFERENCE

  "Life of Gray."--MASON.

  "Life of Gray" ("English Men of Letters").--GOSSE.

  "Gray and his Friends."--TOVEY.

  "Essays."--LOWELL.

  "Letters."--Ed. RIDEOUT.


EDMUND BURKE

(1729-1797)

Edmund Burke was a native of Dublin, Ireland. After a careful
preparatory training, he entered Trinity College, Dublin, where he
showed marked ability in eloquence, history, poetry, and philosophy.
After receiving his master's degree, he went to England, with the
intention of becoming a barrister, but found the profession not to
his taste. He accordingly spent the next six years making the tour of
Great Britain and the Continent, and forming the acquaintance of the
leading literary men.

The first years after his return to England were devoted to literary
work, resulting in two philosophical essays, "Vindication of Natural
Society," and "The Sublime and Beautiful." He also collaborated with
his cousin William Burke in "An Account of the European Settlements
in America."

But he soon turned his attention to politics. In 1766 he was elected
to Parliament, of which he remained a member for twenty-eight years.
He held many other positions under the Government, and his actions
were always distinguished by the strictest integrity. He labored
earnestly in the cause of humanity, against the slave trade and the
oppression of India and the American Colonies. His most widely read
works are his "Speech at the Trial of Warren Hastings," and the
speech on "Conciliation with America." But owing to his increasing
conservatism he failed to appreciate the causes of the French
Revolution and his "Reflections on the Revolution in France" is of
little critical value.

Burke was distinguished by great nobility of mind and purity of
life, both public and private. He possessed great oratorical powers,
a vigorous imagination, a rare gift of observation, and prodigious
industry.

Yet on the other hand, he appears not to have known how to contain
himself, but scattered his eloquence on all occasions, until the
public ear became dulled. He was also of a passionate and intractable
disposition, qualities which in the course of time left him in
political isolation.

Among his friends were Dr. Johnson, Goldsmith, Boswell, Sir Joshua
Reynolds, the famous painter, and Garrick, the great actor. These
were members of the Club, a society of the most brilliant intellects
in England at that day. Burke's learning and power were greatly
venerated by them, and by none more than by Johnson, who admitted
that he must be at his best to meet Burke in argument.


THE MAN

  1. Of what city was Burke a native?

  2. In what branches of learning did he achieve distinction?

  3. State the mode he adopted for completing his education.

  4. Were his first years in England devoted to oratory?

  5. What was the extent of his connection with the British
  Parliament?

  6. Give his views with regard to contemporary conditions in
  India, France, and the American Colonies.

  7. Where did he die?

  8. What was his social environment?


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. What qualities distinguished Burke's oratory? V, 424.

  2. Taking his utterances out of their forensic setting, how would
  they compare with the finest of Milton's prose passages? VIII,
  394.

  3. Were his rhetorical sallies always in good taste? XI, 199.

  4. What great service did he render to the British Constitution?
  XI, 204.

  5. Aside from his oration on Conciliation with the Colonies, what
  evidence have we that Burke was thoroughly informed on American
  affairs?

  6. What great works did he compose in addition to speeches?

  7. What are the principal elements of beauty and power in his
  productions?

  8. What characteristics detracted from permanent popularity?

  9. Is his work characteristic of the Age of Classicism?


FROM "CONCILIATION WITH THE AMERICAN COLONIES"

  1. What reasons does Burke give for concession on England's part
  toward the American colonies?

  2. Why did this statesman consider the use of force impractical?

  3. What nation was very likely meant by "foreign enemy"?

  4. Account for the excessive spirit of liberty which predominates
  in the character of most Americans.

  5. In what respect was England at a great disadvantage in
  governing her colonies? How is this remedied now?

  6. How was religion instrumental in making the colonists more
  dissatisfied with English rule?

  7. What was the condition of education in America at this time?

  8. If England had followed Burke's plan of conciliation, is it
  likely that the American Colonies would have revolted either then
  or in a subsequent generation?


FOR REFERENCE

  "Posthumous Essays."--COLLINS.

  "Obiter Dicta."--BIRRELL.

  "Edmund Burke; an Historical Sketch."--MORLEY.

  "Appreciations and Addresses."--ROSEBERY.


DANIEL WEBSTER

(1782-1852)

Born at Salisbury (now Franklin), New Hampshire, Daniel Webster
received his education at Dartmouth College. He afterward studied law
and then removed to Massachusetts, where he soon obtained distinction
as a politician, and was in 1812 sent to Congress. He championed the
New England cause against the embargo and the other measures of the
administration, yet although his great oratorical powers were already
manifest, he displayed little of that breadth of character which
afterwards distinguished him.

To the years which followed we owe some of his most popular forensic
efforts and public addresses, the "Dartmouth College Case," the
"Girard Will," and the addresses at Plymouth and Bunker Hill.

In 1827 he was elected to the United States Senate. Three years later
he delivered his masterpiece, "The Reply to Hayne," on the floor of
the Senate. Under Presidents Harrison and Tyler he was Secretary
of State, and was instrumental in negotiating the celebrated
"Webster-Ashburton Treaty."

For many years the leading man of the Whig party, his presidential
aspirations were doomed to disappointment. His last years in the
Senate were, like those of Clay, consecrated to the effort to
preserve the Union. But his pleas for compromise fell in the North on
dull ears, and his pleas for concessions to the South were looked on
as treason. The time for compromise was passing.

The Whigs being returned to power in 1850, Webster again became
Secretary of State, but again failing to secure the nomination for
President, he returned to Marshfield, where, after a brief illness,
he died in October, 1852.


THE MAN

  1. Of what college was Webster a graduate?

  2. State the extent to which he filled the public eye at the time
  of his death. III, 271.

  3. In what respect did he "wear the double wreath of professional
  and public supremacy"? III, 273.

  4. What ties bound him to New Hampshire, and what to
  Massachusetts? III, 275.

  5. As a statesman, what division of the country did Webster
  especially represent?

  6. To what political party did he adhere?

  7. To what do you ascribe the unpopularity which embittered his
  declining years?

  8. What important public positions did he fill?


FROM "REPLY TO HAYNE"

  1. State the "nullification doctrine" propounded by Senator Hayne.

  2. Why does Webster defend Massachusetts against the charge of
  having formerly attempted to nullify an act of Congress?

  3. Explain the impracticality of state nullification.

  4. Was the federal government created by the States?

  5. State how the mere existence of the federal constitution
  implies the subordination of the States.

  6. Show how Webster brings ridicule of his opponent to the aid of
  his argument.

  7. What would be the inevitable and direct result of
  nullification?

  8. Do you think the statement of Webster that he was "drawn into
  the debate, with no previous deliberation," etc., to be literally
  true?

  9. Read carefully the peroration, pp. 281-283; one of the
  grandest passages in American eloquence.

  10. Does Webster show the influence of the classics as well as
  the moderns? Compare his style with that of Demosthenes, IV, 161.


FOR REFERENCE

  "Famous American Statesmen."--BOLTON.

  "The True Daniel Webster."--FISHER.

  "Daniel Webster."--MCCALL.

  "John Adams, and Other Essays."--CHAMBERLAIN.

  "Daniel Webster, the Expounder of the Constitution."--WHEELER.

  "American Literature and other Papers."--WHIPPLE.


PLATO

(427 B.C.-347 B.C.)

An Athenian by birth, Plato's youth was spent in the midst of the
tumult and gloom in which Athens, the flower of Greek civilization,
fell victim to her greed and arrogance and succumbed to the sturdy,
rising power of Sparta. But his maturity and later years saw the
growth of a purified and enlightened spirit of culture which raised
Greek thought above local pettiness and prepared for the day of
alliance with Roman enterprise.

His youth was passed under the inspiring guidance of Socrates,
whose searching inquiries into the depths of human nature marked
the beginning of the loftiest philosophy of ancient times. Plato,
and Aristotle, his pupil, carried on the work begun by Socrates,
involving the discussion of the entire experience of Greek life and
the criticism of its principles.

Upon the condemnation and death of Socrates in 399 B.C. the circle of
his disciples was broken up, Plato fleeing with others to Megara. He
spent the next twelve years in travel, visiting most of the centers
of learning of the ancient world. On his return to Athens about 388
B.C. he founded the famous school of the Academy, and settled down to
the study and teaching of philosophy.

His teachings have come down to us in the form of dialogues between
Socrates and his disciples, but as they were written for the purpose
of setting forth Plato's system of philosophy, which differed in some
respects from that of Socrates, we do not of course know to what
extent the narrative is colored. It would appear, however, that in
the simpler dialogues, such as the "Apology," "Crito," "Laches," and
"Charmides," we may possess the unvarnished teachings of Socrates.

In some of his later dialogues the speculative interest is allowed to
become so absorbing that the dialogue form is rather inappropriate;
but the others have been generally acknowledged as comprising the
greatest masterpieces of dialogue that literature has to show,
in the skill with which the scene is suggested, the charm of the
conversation, and the artistic truth with which the characters are
set forth in the changing course of the discussion.

The "Republic" is the best summing up of his philosophy. In it is
best represented his Theory of Ideas, which has made his work the
great type of idealistic philosophy.

He ranks with Aristotle and Kant as one of the three greatest
thinkers of all ages.


THE MAN

  1. During what period of the world's history did Plato live?

  2. From what sources did he derive the principles set forth in
  his teachings?

  3. Of whom was he the disciple, and who in turn was his disciple?

  4. What rank is generally accorded him as a philosopher?

  5. How did Plato look upon pleasure? III, 291.

  6. What is said to have been the manner of his death? III, 281.

  7. By what name is his school of philosophy known?

  8. Who are the three greatest philosophers of the ages?

  9. What was the nature of his education?


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. Are Plato's writings addressed to the select few, or to the
  people of all classes? III, 253.

  2. Give Milton's estimate of the "Republic." IX, 126.

  3. What were Plato's views as to the proper age for marriage? IX,
  190.

  4. And what his views anent the right of the owner of property to
  devise or bequeath it, as he sees fit? IX, 200.

  5. Did the use of dialogue render his writings more effective
  than they otherwise would have been?

  6. Which of his dialogues are most read at the present day, and
  why?

  7. Would Plato have made a successful dramatist if he had turned
  his energies in that direction? Your reason for so thinking?

  8. Which is his greatest work from a philosophical point of view?

  9. Explain his parable of the cave, in the selection from the
  "Republic."


"THE TRIAL OF SOCRATES"

  1. Why was Socrates brought to trial?

  2. What was his refutation to these charges?

  3. What was Socrates's view of death?

  4. Does it seem likely that he might have been acquitted if he
  had used ordinary methods of defense?

  5. Wherein did Socrates's methods of teaching differ from
  ordinary methods of to-day?

  6. What were the customary penalties inflicted for serious crimes?

  7. Did Socrates practise what he preached?

  8. How do the teachings of Socrates compare with those of
  Christianity?

  9. What is the fundamental difference, in your understanding,
  between philosophy and religion?

  10. Did Socrates believe in one God or in many?


FOR REFERENCE

  "Plato" ("The World's Epoch-Makers").--RITCHIE.

  "Dialogues," translated by JOWETT.

  "Plato the Teacher."--BRYAN.

  "Representative Men."--EMERSON.

  "The Myths of Plato."--STEWART.

  "Plato's Republic" ("Historical and Critical Essays").--DE
  QUINCEY.


AURELIUS

(121 A.D.-180 A.D.)

Marcus Aurelius (Antoninus), emperor and philosopher, was the child
of noble parents. His wonderful character, both intellectual and
moral, early attracted the attention of the emperor, Hadrian, who,
when Marcus had attained his seventeenth year, adopted Antoninus Pius
as his successor, upon the condition that the latter adopt Marcus.

Accordingly Marcus was adopted by Pius, who proceeded to lavish upon
him as heir presumptive to the Empire every position for which his
high character and thorough education fitted him; and upon the death
of Pius he ascended the throne, at the age of forty.

His reign covered a period of nineteen years, over two-thirds of
which he spent on the borders of the empire in ceaseless struggles
to sustain the tottering empire against the ravages of the outer
barbarians.

It was during these campaigns that his "Meditations," or "Thoughts,"
his only work, was written. In its present form, at least, it was
never intended for publication, nor is it probable that it was, as
some think, written for the instruction of his son, Commodus. It
was written in Greek, and consists of mere memoranda, disconnected
thoughts, and confessions, evidently hastily noted, a circumstance
which accounts for its repetitions, its obscurity, and its elliptical
form of expression. But in spite of this it has been an inspiration
to the despondent in all ages. Its tone and temper are sweet yet
dignified, courageous yet resigned, philosophical and speculative yet
intensely practical. It stands preëminent among those world-books
which teach men how to live and how to die.

The great blots on his memory, in popular estimation, are the
massacres of Christians in his reign, and his blindness to the
frailty of his wife and the worthlessness of his son. But the
Christians were in those days commonly looked upon as a pernicious
secret cult, and those who comprehend his philosophy will know why he
could see only good in the members of his family.


THE MAN

  1. What circumstance illustrates the great value he set upon time?

  2. Was he considered a man of letters by his contemporaries?

  3. What two others deserve to be remembered with him as Roman
  stoics? V, 90; X, 419.

  4. Why would one hardly expect to find a great philosopher in
  Marcus Aurelius?

  5. Under what circumstances did he become Emperor of Rome?

  6. How were his early years spent?

  7. What was the extent of his education?

  8. Why did he permit the persecution of the Christians?

  9. What circumstances indicate the nobility of his character?

  10. What other author wrote a work for the instruction of his
  son, and, like Aurelius, was blind to the son's faults? III, 240.

  11. Summarize his character.


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. To what are his literary remains confined?

  2. Were they written in Latin?

  3. Under what circumstances were the "Meditations" composed?

  4. For what purpose were they written?

  5. In what form have they come down to us?

  6. Does Aurelius consider that the absence of an overruling
  Providence would relax moral obligations?

  7. What position do the "Meditations" hold in the world's
  literature?

  8. What is the spirit of the philosophy which they breathe?

  9. Probably no other book of the ancients is as widely read
  to-day. Why is this?

  10. Do its defects of form detract from its value?


FROM "MEDITATIONS"

  1. From the viewpoint of this philosopher, are poverty, death,
  and sickness inflicted on people as punishment for sins?

  2. To what frame of mind does a righteous person school himself?

  3. What prescription is given for the making of a happy man?

  4. Would Marcus Aurelius have been in sympathy with the medieval
  custom of pious people who shut themselves up in monasteries or
  other secluded places?

  5. Explain the relationship of man to his fellow beings.

  6. Does this environment have an influence in the altering of an
  adult's character?

  7. Why does each of us live a complete life, whether we die young
  or old?

  8. Judging the Emperor's character from his writings, would you
  consider him a wise ruler?


FOR REFERENCE

  "Essays in Criticism."--ARNOLD.

  "Marcus Aurelius and the Later Stoics."--BUSSELL.

  "Seekers after God."--FARRAR.

  "Glimpses of Truth."--SPALDING.

  "Excursions in Art and Letters."--STORY.


FRANCIS BACON

(1561-1626)

Francis Bacon was born three years before his great contemporary,
William Shakespeare, but survived him many years. He was born in high
station and had every educational advantage which the times afforded.
He was the nephew of William Cecil, Elizabeth's great minister, and,
entering public life, himself became the favorite minister of James
I and Lord High Chancellor of England. But his character was not
in keeping with his literary merits and ability. He was venal and
corrupt, took bribes as a judge and sold justice for a price. He has
been called the wisest and meanest of mankind.

By the introduction of the inductive method in logic, Bacon overthrew
the scholastic system and facilitated the study of modern science.
It is true the inductive method was known before Bacon, but it had
been in general neglected. The great philosophical works which
accomplished this revolution were the "Advancement of Learning," and
the "Novum Organum." The latter and others of his metaphysical works
were written in Latin in order to reach a wider circle of readers!

His "Essays" are the best known and most popular of his writings.
The style is all his own; elaborate, sententious, often witty, often
metaphorical, and possessing a degree of conciseness rarely found in
the compositions of the Elizabethan age. Every sentence is pregnant
with thought. He alone of the writers of his time strikes straight at
the root of the matter.

What peculiarly impresses one in his "Essays" is the undoubted
truthfulness of the propositions advanced, and the manner in which he
illuminates his thought by the form in which he casts it. The slight
tinge of casuistry noticeable in his writings is in keeping with the
times.

The "Essays" were at first mere jottings down of desultory ideas,
mere note-book memoranda. They were revised and expanded from time to
time until they reached their present shape.


THE MAN

  1. Of what great English poet was Bacon a contemporary?

  2. From what walk of life did Bacon come? What can you say of his
  preparation for literature?

  3. What were his political connections?

  4. How do Bacon's moral qualities compare with his intellectual
  ability?

  5. As a judge, did Bacon have a high regard for justice and the
  'judicial ermine'?

  6. What popular saying aptly describes his character?


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. What services did Bacon render to the scientific world?

  2. Was Bacon the first to make use of the inductive method in
  investigations?

  3. Name his leading philosophical works.

  4. Why are his philosophical works not accessible to the ordinary
  reader?

  5. Which of his works are most read at the present day?

  6. Does Bacon imitate any former authors or borrow from any
  former school of thought?

  7. What are the distinguishing characteristics of Bacon's style?

  8. Contrast his style with that of his contemporaries.

  9. Why is it that the matters stated in the "Essays" strike you
  as being things which you have always known?

  10. Knowing as we do in advance the truth of most of what he
  says, why do we derive such peculiar pleasure from reading his
  works?

  11. What can you say as to the suggestiveness of his writings?

  12. What trait, constantly appearing in his writings, is
  displeasing to the modern reader?

  13. How can you account for the lack of system in the choice of
  subjects treated in the "Essays"?


"THE PRAISE OF KNOWLEDGE"

  1. Which are the greater and truer pleasures, those of the
  intellect or those of the affections?

  2. What is Bacon's method of reasoning, and what are its
  advantages over the method of Aristotle?

  3. Did Aristotle have many followers in the universities of
  Europe in Bacon's day?

  4. What was Bacon's criticism of Greek philosophy and science?

  5. What arguments does Bacon give to show the importance of
  knowledge above all other possessions?

  6. What sarcasm do you detect in Bacon's reference to the
  universities?

  7. What great intellectual movement resulted in part, at least,
  from the three inventions mentioned, viz., printing, artillery,
  and the compass?

  8. What familiar quotation do you note in this essay?

  9. Does Bacon attain as high intellectual levels as Plato? As
  Marcus Aurelius?


FOR REFERENCE

  "Bacon" ("English Men of Letters").--CHURCH.

  "Francis Bacon; a Sketch of His Life, Works, etc."--STEEVES.

  "Bacon" ("Critical and Miscellaneous Essays").--MACAULAY.

  "Account of the Life and Times of Lord Bacon."--SPEDDING.


THOMAS CARLYLE

(1795-1881)

Carlyle was the son of a stone mason. He entered the University
of Edinburgh at the age of thirteen and remained there five
years, proving himself an omnivorous reader but impractical in
many respects, so that he took no degree. After several years of
hardship in Scotland as a teacher and a hack writer he married Jane
Welsh, whose intellect was almost the equal of his own and whose
eccentricity of temper was also similar to his, with the result
that much of their life was marred by bickering; yet there is no
question of their mutual affection. After a long fight against
poverty in London, he eventually won the esteem of Europe for his
bold personality and titanic literary power and died full of years
and honors, but sensitive and harsh to the last. It is only fair to
mention that he was the victim of lifelong dyspeptic trouble and the
depression resultant therefrom.

His writings all make a study of life, seeking the answer in the
lives of the great men, the Heroes, whether of literature or of
history. His early studies in German literature, especially the work
of Goethe, influenced him not only in his outlook on the universe
but in his literary style. Sacrificing everything to force, he adopts
every expedient to drive home each point in the lesson he wishes to
convey. This intense earnestness and unprecedented unconventionality,
although united with phenomenal descriptive powers, resulted in
an ungainly style, yet so filled with sincerity and the hatred of
shams and falsity as to hold and inspire not merely a select circle
of readers but a whole nation. His influence was that of a living
personality, a prophet to all English-speaking peoples.

"Sartor Resartus" expresses the doubts and hesitancies of youth,
when confronted with the materialism and apparent relentlessness of
nature, together with the bold, sturdy defiance which youth's courage
creates for its protection. In "Heroes and Hero-Worship," the "Essay
on Burns," "The French Revolution," and the "History of Frederick the
Great" he holds up examples of heroism as he sees them, searchingly
and vividly. So in the "Life of John Sterling," he studies the
character of one of his dearest friends, recently dead, and there
finds the same qualities of manly nobility. His work becomes not only
biographical but historical, obviously, and such volumes as "Past and
Present" and "Latter-Day Pamphlets" attack flagrant weaknesses of his
day. Work that is so daring and furious in tone could not be utterly
free from error; his conclusions are not always justified. Yet he
will always remain the prophet and seer of his century.


THE MAN

  1. Of what extraction was Carlyle?

  2. What was the nature of his education?

  3. What occupations did he follow?

  4. What places were the scenes of his literary life?

  5. Do you think he can be called a genial soul?

  6. Would you call him a typical or an exceptional Scotchman?


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. What was the purpose of his writings? Is he a philosopher?

  2. What particular phase of history interested him most?

  3. Is he at his best in narration or description?

  4. What is the source and the cause of his style?

  5. Account for the distinct feeling of reality which arises from
  a reading of his descriptive passages.

  6. What work best illustrates his element of strength?

  7. What defects are apparent in much of his writing?

  8. Are his accounts of Coleridge, Burns, and Mahomet sympathetic?
  Which do you prefer? Why?

  9. Is he religious or unreligious in your opinion? Why do you
  think so?

  10. Among what people have his writings the greatest vogue? Why?

  11. What trait renders Carlyle unreliable as a critic? I, 168.

  12. Into what did Carlyle transmute the principles of German
  philosophy? XI, 445.


"THE FALL OF THE BASTILLE"

  1. What act on the part of Louis XVI caused the smouldering flame
  of revolution to break out in this demonstration of violence?

  2. How is the term Eumenides appropriate when applied to the
  Parisian mob of the French Revolution? (Consult a classical
  dictionary.)

  3. Contrast the French and the English in revolutions.

  4. Why did Carlyle choose the subject of the French Revolution?

  5. What was the form of government at Paris during the Revolution?

  6. Briefly describe the condition of the lower classes as
  indicated in this account.

  7. Are any of the other selections from Carlyle equal to this?
  Why?


FOR REFERENCE

  "Reminiscences."--CARYLE, ed. NORTON.

  "Carlyle, Personally and in his Writings."--MASSON.

  "Literary Remains."--JAMES.

  "Thomas Carlyle."--CONWAY.

  "Thomas Carlyle."--FROUDE.


JOHN RUSKIN

(1819-1900)

The son of a Scotch millionaire who had settled in London, Ruskin
received from private masters the best possible preparation for his
future and also traveled extensively with his father and mother.
Shortly after his graduation from Oxford he astonished the world with
the first volume of "Modern Painters," a work designed primarily to
show the superiority of Turner, and a few other modern artists, over
the older painters of landscape; in later volumes he wanders over the
whole field of art criticism, the burden of his advice being a return
to the study of nature itself.

"The Seven Lamps of Architecture" discusses the moral principles
which should underlie architecture. This subject was suggested to him
by his continual studies of the work of painters and architects in
Italy and France while in pursuit of material for his earlier work.
"The Stones of Venice" carries on the task set in both these works,
namely the problem of the moral basis underneath all art, the purpose
which should lie at the back of the artist's mind.

As he grew older his religious views, formerly rather narrow, became
broader, in common with the progress of the times, yet he laid more
and more stress on the need of upright and godly character in all who
have any purpose of attempting good work.

His later volumes, then, are filled with this moral teaching and also
take up the errors of the social conditions of the period. Old age
pensions, state education, radical improvements in the houses and
home life of the common people were among the needs which he saw, now
accomplished, but then regarded as rampant and foolish socialism.

In his style, as in his theories, there is a tendency to exaggerate,
a fault that is common among reformers, as in the cases of Dickens
and Carlyle. But the lofty ideals which he maintained and the grace
and power of his style far more than atone for the occasional error
of overstatement. In "Præterita," a brilliant autobiographical
fragment, he accounts for the rare clarity and beauty of his style,
for it was his custom for many years during his childhood and youth
to read the Bible through aloud to his mother every year in daily
selections. The simplicity and majesty of the Biblical language left
its impress on his own prose.

His economic theories have not been adopted in England or elsewhere,
but he himself lived up to them and spent his whole fortune in the
philanthropic endeavor to put his plans for the betterment of the
working classes into operation. In spite of the fact that his fortune
was great and that he received as much as $20,000 a year royalty from
the sale of his works in his latter days, his property at the time of
his death was inconsiderable.


THE MAN

  1. What was Ruskin's education; his position in the world?

  2. In what two rôles did he appear?

  3. What cardinal doctrine did he preach?

  4. What extraneous elements did he attempt to read into art?

  5. At what university was he successively student and professor?

  6. Was he merely a theorist in the matter of public reform?

  7. Did he justify his economic teaching in his own conduct?


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. Which of his works treats of the effect of human traits upon
  architecture?

  2. Name four works treating of Italian art specifically.

  3. In what work does he seek to demonstrate the superiority of
  modern over classical painters?

  4. Had Ruskin any practical knowledge of the technique of art?

  5. Which of his works is autobiographical?

  6. Where did he get the inspiration for his style?

  7. How, then, can his style be called original?

  8. Is his style clear; logical; powerful? Why?


FROM "THE STONES OF VENICE"

  1. What two orders of architecture are fundamental?

  2. From what country are they primarily derived?

  3. What is the distinguishing character of each?

  4. How did Christianity affect architecture?

  5. When the progress of advancement in architecture was losing
  its vitality with the Romans, who took up their work?

  6. What two nations played the most important part?

  7. Describe the effects of each upon the older forms of
  architecture.

  8. Why is Venice the best place to study the different forms of
  architecture?


"THE LAMP OF TRUTH"

  1. Is falsity permissible under any circumstances?

  2. Upon what does the pardonableness of a fault depend?

  3. Which temptation is the harder to resist, that to tell a
  "little lie," or a great one?

  4. Is all imagination or fiction reprehensible as being
  untruthful?

  5. How may truth be violated in Architecture?

  6. What three forms does architectural deceit take?

  7. Give examples of each.

  8. Why are machine work and cast work bad?

  9. Concrete was unknown in Ruskin's day; what are its faults and
  its values?

  10. Explain the decay and deterioration of Gothic tracery.


FOR REFERENCE

  "Life of John Ruskin."--COLLINGWOOD.

  "Ruskin and his Circle."--EARLAND.

  "Studies in Ruskin."--COOK.

  "Witnesses of the Light."--GLADDEN.

  "Essays in Biography and Criticism."--BAYNE.

  "Literary Leaders of Modern England."--DAWSON.

  "John Ruskin" ("English Men of Letters").--HARRISON.


RALPH WALDO EMERSON

(1803-1882)

Emerson, the 'Sage of Concord,' was born a Bostonian, of the
ecclesiastical class. He prepared for the ministry and for some time
occupied a Unitarian pulpit; but, disagreeing with his congregation
as to the nature of the Lord's Supper, he resigned his charge and
became a public lecturer, a popular profession in ante-bellum days
when every community had its Literary Society, or else its Debating
Club. His home from 1833, or for the last fifty years of his life,
was at Concord, Massachusetts. He shares with Longfellow the
distinction of being the best known abroad of all American writers.
No other American has measurably approached him as an essayist.

He is a transcendentalist of the most advanced school. Where he
wishes to be clear, no one can be clearer, but he often chooses
to clothe his thoughts in mystery. This trait is also noticeable
in his poems, some of which glitter like diamonds, while others
are enigmatic and baffling. His poetry is like his essays in being
pointed and laconic, but while this may be a merit in the essay, it
is not so in poetry, and his verse can hardly be considered first
class. Few people read his poetry except as an adjunct to the study
of his essays.

He had no reasoned and complete system of philosophy, but, like
Bacon, merely gave birth to grand principles from which a new
philosophy was to spring. He resembles Bacon also in that he
oftentimes does not reason, but utters the truth oracularly.


THE MAN

  1. Where was Emerson born?

  2. What can you say of his antecedents?

  3. With what religious denomination was he at one time connected?

  4. What part did Emerson take in public life?

  5. What pseudonym is often applied to him?

  6. For what two things is Concord equally famous? I, 340; V, 59.

  7. How do the circumstances of his life contrast with Ruskin's,
  Carlyle's, Plato's, Marcus Aurelius's?


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. To what school of philosophy did Emerson belong?

  2. What effect had Emerson on the thinkers of his generation? VI,
  332-334.

  3. Did Hawthorne prize his philosophy highly? His poetry? VI, 333.

  4. How does he rank as an essayist?

  5. Why are some of Emerson's thoughts so hard to grasp?

  6. To what may his poems be compared?

  7. Does he rank high as a poet?

  8. What standing has Emerson among foreign critics as compared
  with other American authors?

  9. How does his style compare with Ruskin's and Carlyle's? with
  Plato's?


"WORKS AND DAYS"

  1. How does Emerson define the nineteenth century? Why?

  2. "Works and days were offered us and we took works;" does
  Emerson belittle the value of work?

  3. Name some of the 'illusions' that hide values from us at the
  present time.

  4. "'Tis the measure of a man,--his apprehension of a day;" how
  is this true?

  5. Does Emerson prove his statements, or do you think that he is
  playing the oracle in this essay?

  6. "What has been best done in the world ... cost nothing;" do
  you agree wholly with this doctrine?

  7. Do we live up to the teaching of the last paragraph; should we
  attempt to do so?


"FRIENDSHIP"

  1. Give Emerson's definition of friendship.

  2. Why are most so-called friendships of short duration?

  3. Does age, sex, individual character, or circumstance influence
  the formation of this compact?

  4. What are the two most important elements in friendship?

  5. Can a perfect friendship exist between more than two people at
  one time?

  6. Does friendship necessarily require an intimate personal
  association of the participants in their home life?

  7. Must friendship be reciprocal?

  8. Would you accept Emerson's views on this subject for your own
  use?


FOR REFERENCE

  "Emerson; his Life, Writings and Philosophy."--COOKE.

  "Four American Leaders."--ELIOT.

  "Leading American Essayists."--PAYNE.

  "Ralph Waldo Emerson" ("Beacon Biographies").--SANBORN.

  "Emerson" ("English Men of Letters").--WOODBERRY.

  "Discourses in America."--ARNOLD.

  "Emerson as a Poet."--BENTON.

  "American Prose Masters."--BROWNELL.

  "On Emerson, and Other Essays."--MAETERLINCK.


HEINRICH HEINE

(1799-1856)

Heinrich Heine, the nephew of a rich Hamburg Jew, is the most gifted
German lyric poet since Goethe. Intended for the bar, he studied at
Bonn, Göttingen, and Berlin. He then traveled extensively for some
years, until publication of his "Journey in the Hartz Mountains" and
"Book of Songs" brought him to public notice.

But his tactless attacks on various authors, and upon several of the
petty German governments of the day began to make his native country
an uncomfortable place, and in 1831 he removed to Paris. His chief
occupation there was as correspondent for German newspapers. His
long poems, "Deutschland" and "Atta Troll," were written during this
period. For the last eight years of his life he was confined to his
bed, suffering terrible agonies from a disease of the spinal column.

Though born a Jew and baptized into the Christian faith, he was
neither Jew nor Christian; and his character was marred by many
defects.


THE MAN

  1. In what city was he born? I, 171.

  2. When did he take up his residence in Paris? I, 176.

  3. What great faults stained his character? I, 190.

  4. And how have they affected the character of his writings? I,
  191.

  5. See Heine's account of his first interview with Goethe. VIII,
  174.

  6. What caused his exile from Germany?

  7. How does his early life resemble that of Goethe?

  8. What position does he occupy among the German lyric poets of
  the nineteenth century?


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. Upon what service to modern society does Heine's fame rest? I,
  167.

  2. Of what great German writer is he the continuator? I, 168.

  3. Did he have a true conception of Goethe's work? I, 169.

  4. Upon what grounds did Heine prefer the French spirit to that
  of the Germans and English? I, 172, 173.

  5. Why has his fame proved more lasting than that of Byron and
  Shelley? I, 181.

  6. To what school of poetry did he belong? I, 178.

  7. State the form which most of his poetry assumes. I, 183.

  8. Is his Hebrew extraction apparent in his verse? I, 186.


FROM "TRAVEL PICTURES"

  1. The German nation as a whole is noted for what special
  qualities of character?

  2. In connection with what great event would you associate the
  name of Blücher? IV, 37.

  3. Of what cause do the Swiss claim to be the champions?

  4. During Heine's life was Germany politically at rest?

  5. Would you consider the carousing scene of this selection
  typical of Germany, or has Heine exaggerated it to make the
  situation more ridiculous?

  6. What impression of the author's personal character do you
  receive from these selections?

  7. Characterize Heine's wit.


FOR REFERENCE

  "Life of Heinrich Heine."--SHARP.

  "Poems and Ballads," translated by MARTIN.

  "Wrecked lives; or, Men who have Failed."--ADAMS.

  "Old Love Stories Retold."--LE GALLIENNE.


PLINY

(61 A.D.-113? A.D.)

Pliny the Younger was born in the year A.D. 61, at Como, Italy. Like
most famous Roman writers whose works have come down to us, he was
of high station. He accompanied his uncle, Pliny the Elder, when the
latter was summoned to Rome by the Emperor Vespasian in A.D. 72, and
devoted several years to the study of Roman and Greek literature
under the best instructors.

After the death of his uncle, in 79, he made his appearance as an
advocate, a profession in which he won great eminence. Ten years
later he entered upon an official career of remarkable success,
holding in succession most of the great offices of the Roman State,
until in 111 he was selected by Trajan as Governor of Bithynia.
His correspondence ceases in 113, and nothing is known of his life
thereafter.

While moving in the highest circles, the intimate of Tacitus,
Suetonius, Martial, and all of the senatorial class, he was
distinguished by great conscientiousness and public spirit, endowing
temples, baths, libraries, and schools. He was humane and even
affectionate toward his slaves and courteous to his dependents.

He sought fame as a poet and orator, as well as letter-writer, but
neither his "Panegyric on Trajan," nor the two sets of verses which
alone have escaped the ravages of time, would indicate that the world
is much the worse for the loss of the remainder of his orations and
poems.

But in his "Letters" he conferred an inestimable boon on future ages.
They are voluminous, in ten books, and covering almost every topic
of the times, our most valuable commentary upon Roman life in the
second century after Christ. They were undoubtedly written with a
direct view to publication, for he is careful to confine each one to
a single topic, and generally closes it with an epigrammatic point.
But they are models of graceful thought and refined expression.
Only twice is any one of whom an unfavorable opinion is expressed
mentioned by name.

The tenth book, the "Correspondence with Trajan," is valuable for
another reason--for the light it throws on early Christianity. It
reflects the greatest credit on the strict and almost punctilious
conscientiousness of Pliny, and on the assiduity and high principle
which animated the Emperor.


THE MAN

  1. What does Pliny the Elder say of the form of money used in
  early Rome? XI, 189.

  2. To what class of society did Pliny the Younger belong?

  3. Give a brief account of the death of his uncle.

  4. What other author do you associate with the Lake of Como? I,
  8, illustration.

  5. What regular profession did Pliny follow during the earlier
  years of his life? The latter?

  6. Locate Bithynia on the map. Also Lake Como. (See classical
  atlas.)

  7. What authors were intimate associates of Pliny?

  8. Enumerate the good points in his character.


STYLE AND WORKS

  1. In what way does Pliny say we may add to the length of our
  lives? V, 71.

  2. Are his writings confined to his "Letters"?

  3. Of what special use are the "Letters" to us?

  4. How do we know that Pliny wrote his letters with publication
  in mind?

  5. What does he say of Phidias's attention to detail in his
  sculpture? VI, 359.

  6. Why should his correspondence with Trajan be of special
  interest to us?

  7. What do we glean from the correspondence as to the character
  of Trajan?

  8. Compare his account of the destruction of Pompeii with that of
  Lytton. VIII, 285.

  9. State what proficiency the Romans had attained in the art of
  landscape gardening.

  10. What would you judge to have been the climate of Tuscany,
  from the allusion to plane, cypress, and other trees and plants
  mentioned?

  11. What reason lay behind the persecution of the Christians? Do
  you think it was entirely religious?

  12. What was the social condition of Rome at this time?

  13. Did persecution lessen the number of adherents to
  Christianity?

  14. What was Pliny's estimate of this religion?

  15. Was Trajan a just ruler, if his short letter be taken as an
  indication of his character?


FOR REFERENCE

  "Roman Life in Pliny's Time."--PELLISON.

  "Letters."--Ed. BOSANQUET.

  "Roads from Rome."--ALLINSON.




FOOTNOTES:

[1] These authors represent the transition from the Renaissance to
Classicism.

[2] Josephus is a remarkable example of the authority and influence
of Rome. He was a Jew, whose work might be classed as Hebrew and
hence as Oriental literature, and likewise as Greek literature
since he wrote in Greek. But he was educated at Rome and trained so
thoroughly upon Roman ideas and thought that his writings must be
included under this head.

[3] See Latin Lit., _note_.




  TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  Bold text is denoted by =equal signs=.

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within
  the text and consultation of external sources.

  Footnote [1] is referenced multiple times from page 25.

  Footnote [3] ("See Latin Lit., _note_") is in fact referencing
  Footnote [2].

  Except for those changes noted below, all misspellings in the text,
  and inconsistent or archaic usage, have been retained. For example,
  death-bed, deathbed; Snow Image, Snow-Image; skilful; unexcelled;
  unreligious; unmoral; enigmatical.

  Pg 8, 'Knights Templars' replaced by 'Knights Templar'.
  Pg 24, 'inelegancies' replaced by 'inelegances'.
  Pg 48, 'sublety' replaced by 'subtlety'.
  Pg 54k, 'Dies Irae' replaced by 'Dies Iræ' for consistency.
  Pg 135, '428-31' replaced by '428-431' for consistency.
  Pg 147, 'impracticability' replaced by 'impracticality'.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Library of Entertainment Handbook, by 
John Chilton Scammell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIBRARY OF ENTERTAINMENT ***

***** This file should be named 51248-0.txt or 51248-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/2/4/51248/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, John Campbell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
